ak See: 


i ‘il 
ili 


HON MAS BULKOWSKI 
WILEY 


Encyclopedia 
of 
Chart Patterns 


Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publish- 
ing company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, 
Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing 
print and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional and 
personal knowledge and understanding. 

The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived 
the market’s ever-changing temperament and have prospered—some by rein- 
venting systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice trader, 
professional, or somewhere in-between, these books will provide the advice 
and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future. 

For a list of available titles, visit our website at www. WileyFinance.com. 


Encyclopedia 
of 
Chart Patterns 


THIRD EDITION 
I fl 
ay 


Thomas Bulkowski 


WILEY 


Copyright © 2021 by Thomas Bulkowski. All rights reserved. 


Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. 
Published simultaneously in Canada. 


No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 

in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or 
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through pay- 
ment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. 
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011, fax 201-748- 
6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions. 


Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and the author have used their 
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to 
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied 
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created 
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies con- 
tained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional 
where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any loss of profit or 
any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or 
other damages. 


For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer 
Care Department within the United States 800-762-2974, outside the United States at 
317- 572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002. 


Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in 
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, 
visit our Web site at www.wiley.com. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data: 


Names: Bulkowski, Thomas N., author. 

Title: Encyclopedia of chart patterns / Thomas Bulkowski. 

Description: Third edition. | Hoboken, New Jersey : Wiley, [2020] | Series: 
Wiley trading | Includes index. 

Identifiers: LCCN 2020055782 (print) | LCCN 2020055783 (ebook) | ISBN 
9781119739685 (hardback) | ISBN 9781119739722 (adobe pdf) | ISBN 
9781119739692 (epub) 

Subjects: LCSH: Stocks—Charts, diagrams, etc. | Commodity futures—Charts, 
diagrams, etc. | Investment analysis. 

Classification: LCC HG4638 .B85 2020 (print) | LCC HG4638 (ebook) | DDC 
332.63/222—dc23 

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020055782 

LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/202005 5783 


Cover Design: Wiley 
Cover Image: © Abstractor/Shutterstock, © SilverCircle/Shutterstock 


Set in 11/13.5pt Janson Text LT Std by SPi Global, Chennai, India 


100987654321 


To my parents, 
who continued to love me even after my homemade 
rocket set the lawn on fire, and to my four-legged best friend, 


Rusty, 
who saved my life; it grieves me that I couldn’t save yours. 


Titles by Thomas Bulkowski 


Chart Patterns after the Buy 

Describes key elements involved in making chart patterns work so you 
can profit after you buy. It provides a number of scenarios to compare 
against your current situation to see if your selection will outperform. 


Encyclopedia of Candlestick Charts 
The only candlestick book that statistically tests 103 candle patterns and 
reports on performance in a clear and concise manner. 


Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns 
A popular reference book that takes apart 75 chart patterns, tests them, 
and describes how they behave. 


Fundamental Analysis and Position Trading: Evolution of a Trader 
Describes how value investing can improve your wealth. It tests funda- 
mentals such as the price-to-earnings ratio, book value, debt levels, and 
so on. Do they work? 


Getting Started in Chart Patterns 
A popular, low-cost choice for people wishing to become familiar with 
chart patterns and how to trade using them. 


Swing and Day Trading: Evolution of a Trader 
A how-to book that explains swing and day trading using chart patterns. 


Trading Basics: Evolution of a Trader 

Covers the basics of trading and investing, like position sizing, scaling in 
and out of positions, leverage, and so on, and then tests them to see which 
work best. 


Trading Classic Chart Patterns 
Presents a chart pattern scoring system to select patterns that outperform. 


Visual Guide to Chart Patterns 
An entry-level guide to chart patterns, in color, including buy and sell 
signals, quizzes, and more. 


vii 


Preface to the 
Third Edition 


I receive a lot of emails from people wanting to know the fastest way to lose 
money. They don’t phrase it like that, of course. “I want to trade Forex full 
time,” using massive leverage. “I need to make money because I quit my job, I 
have $10 in trading capital, and I’m in debt up to my eyeballs. Can you help?” 

One trader, let me call her Lisa, found success using this book. In just 
over a year, she made $5 million. On paper. Then she used real money, funded 
in part by help from her parents. 

What happened? 

Lisa made over a thousand percent and bought her dad a boat. 

Can | adopt her? 

For some, like Lisa, this book is a shortcut to making money. I’ve done 
the heavy lifting by researching and cataloging chart patterns for more than 
two decades. I packaged that research and experience into this book. It’s a thick 
book. It’s an expensive book. And it’s worth every cent as Lisa found out. 

All of my books sell well because I do one thing which few authors do: I 
prove what I write. I don’t just copy the ideas of others who copied them from 
someone else. My books break new ground. I’m the person others are steal- 
ing their ideas from. You'll find my ideas between the covers of this book in 
easy-to-understand language. There, I share performance details on 75 chart 
patterns. Some patterns work. Some are best left untouched. And some that 
don’t work turn into money makers when they bust their downward breakouts. 


This Book 


This book has information that will give you an edge to put you ahead of other 
traders. But information is only one ingredient to success. You have to under- 
stand how to use it. 


x Preface to the Third Edition 


In the Glossary near the back of this book, I have listed the Results Snap- 
shot followed by nine statistics tables, the same ones used in most chapters. 
There, I explain each table entry. If you’re ever confused about the meaning of 
a table entry or how I measured performance, then check the Glossary. 

Following the Glossary is terminology. It explains important terms used 
in this book. 

There’s also a Visual Index of chart patterns hidden back there. If you 
can’t make sense of the squiggles on your price chart, then maybe the visual 
index can help identify the pattern. 

This book is a reference tool, not a novel where you discover the butler 
did it, and it’s not a book you'll want to read from cover to cover. I tried to 
lighten up the prose in this edition. You may find my humor misses the mark. 
At least I woke you up. 


What's New? 


Maybe you already own the first or second edition. Why buy the book again? 
The first edition was like owning a horse. The second edition was like owning 
a model T. This edition is like owning the DeLorean time machine from the 
movie Back to the Future. 


¢ T added chapters covering 23 new chart patterns. 

¢ Additional samples. This edition reports on 150,000 samples, ten 
times the first edition (15,000) and almost four times the second edi- 
tion (38,500). 

¢ New tables. All tables are still easy to understand. The new tables are: 
¢ How often stops hit (provides guidance for placing stop loss orders) 
¢ Performance and failures over time (do chart patterns work as 

well today as they did 30 years ago?) 

¢ Busted patterns (can you make more money trading failed patterns?) 
¢ Special features (shows statistics unique to some chart patterns) 

¢ Experience section. If I have traded a chart pattern, I discuss my expe- 
rience with it, including lessons learned. 

¢ Easy to use. Bold table references (example: Table 34.1), chart refer- 
ences (example: Figure 27.5), and descriptive table entries (example: 
Days to ultimate high) help make finding your place in the text and 
locating the discussion for a table entry or figure easier. 


Preface to the Third Edition xi 


About the Statistics 


With four times as many samples as in the second edition, and with perfor- 
mance drifting over the 15 years since I updated this book, many statistics will 
have changed, sometimes substantially. 

Don’t be alarmed. 

The statistics in this book allow you to compare the performance of one 
chart pattern to another (which I make easy in the Statistics Summary at the 
back of the book). The performance results are mot meant to suggest you can 
make 55% trading bump-and-run reversal bottoms (the best performing chart 
pattern with an average rise of 55%). You can make 55%, but only if you trade 
the chart pattern perfectly, and do so 1,099 times. Is that going to happen? 

No. 

You can do better. 

If you’re serious about trading the stock market, or investing for the long 
haul, this book might be the answer to your dreams. And if not, then each night 
read one of the Sample Trades to your children as a bedtime story. Most won’t 
give them nightmares, and they are too young to care anyway. 

But they might grow up to be traders like Lisa who’ll buy you a boat. 


‘Tuomas N. BuLKowsKI 
January 2021 


Preface to the 
Second Edition 


On 24 March 2000, the financial world changed. No, that was not the date this 
book first hit the store shelves, but the beginning of a bear market that lasted 
2.5 years. Finally, I had bear market data to use for finding chart patterns! 

After spending nearly 5 years recovering from the work needed to com- 
plete the first edition, I decided to undertake an update. I changed the editorial 
content of the book in small ways, but made substantial improvements in oth- 
ers. Here is the list of the important changes: 


¢ Bull and bear market statistics for complete coverage. 
¢ Expanded statistics, all in a similar format: 


Results Snapshot, at the start of each chapter, shows the most important 
numbers and surprises. 

General statistics, including the average rise or decline, busted pattern 
performance, and benchmark performance. 

Failure rates, a list of ten breakpoints to show how often a pattern fails. 

Breakout and post-breakout statistics, showing performance over the 
yearly price range, pullback rates, and performance after a gap. 

Frequency distribution of days to the ultimate high or low, showing 
when the trend is likely to end. 

Size statistics, describing how performance varies for pattern height, 
width, and combinations of both. 

Volume statistics, including volume trend, a new concept I call volume 
shapes, and breakout day volume. 

For best performance, a list of trading tips and where to find them in 
each chapter. 


xiii 


xiv Preface to the Second Edition 


¢ More chart patterns. I added 14 new chart patterns. 

¢ Event patterns. I added 9 new types of patterns, which I call event pat- 
terns. These include earnings surprises, drug approvals, store sales, and 
stock upgrades and downgrades. 

¢ More samples. I found over 38,500 chart pattern samples, more than 

double the 15,000 used in the first edition. 

Keyed table entries. Each table entry appears in bold at the start of its 

corresponding text discussion for easy locating. 


Glossary and methodology. Instead of peppering the text with repeated 
explanations, a new chapter explains how I arrived at each table entry. 


Thanks to the thousands who purchased the first edition. I am confident 
that this second edition will help you become a more knowledgeable and suc- 
cessful trader. 


‘Tuomas N. BuLtKowskKI 
January 2005 


Preface to the 
First Edition 


When I was a little tyke, I decided the easiest way to riches was to play the 
stock market. It was, after all, a level playing field, a negative-sum game with 
somebody winning and somebody losing. (Hint: The winner is always the bro- 
ker.) All one had to do to win was pick stocks that went up and avoid stocks 
that went down. Easy. 

I kept this in mind when I graduated from Syracuse University with an 
engineering degree and showed up early for my first professional job. Each 
morning I cracked open the newspaper and plotted my stock picks on a piece 
of graph paper taped to the wall. Bob, my office mate, used the same news- 
paper to select his stocks. I chose my selections after exhausting fundamental 
research, but Bob simply closed his eyes, twirled his hand around, and plunged 
his finger into the newspaper. When he opened his eyes and removed his fin- 
ger, he announced another pick. 

After several months of tracking both our selections, I made a startling 
discovery: I was getting creamed. Bob’s random selections were beating the tar 
out of my carefully researched choices. I also discovered something else: I was 
learning a lot by paper trading. 

With the hesitancy and distrust inherited from my parents, I studied two 
dozen firms before making my final selection and first purchase: I opened a 
money market account. The timing was excellent; I was earning over 17% on 
my cash. At first glance, the return might imply a very risky investment, but it 
was not. The prime rate was, after all, at 21%. 

Flush with success, I gathered my courage and opened a brokerage 
account and began investing the few pennies I saved. Again, the timing was 
excellent as I caught the beginning of a major bull market. I bought a stock at 
a split-adjusted price of 88 cents and watched it go to $30 and change. 

Lest you think that everything was easy, consider what happened. My 
stock portfolio was growing by leaps and bounds, but my professional career 
was about to take a turn for the worse. After switching careers more often 


XV 


xvi Preface to the First Edition 


than I sometimes like to admit, I landed a job with a company I could finally 
call home—a job that would last a lifetime, or so I hoped. Almost 6 months 
after my 10-year anniversary with the company, I received a letter from the 
chairman. He congratulated me on my decade with the company and looked 
forward to even more success for me in the coming years. 

Six weeks later I was laid off. 


The Missing Million 


I took stock of the situation and decided that, at the age of 36, I had enough. 
Newspapers term guys like me The Missing Million. We are the ones who, for 
whatever reason, leave their jobs and decide not to go back into the workforce. 
We retire. Everyone, and I mean everyone (with the notable exception of my 
cousin Mary Ann—bless her heart), thinks we are nuts. 

They’re right, of course! 

For the longest time, I have been fascinated with technical analysis of 
stocks. In the early years, I considered the little squiggles to be nothing short 
of voodoo. Still, I was curious as to why the major brokerage houses were hir- 
ing technical analysts in droves. But I did not dare take my eye off the funda- 
mentals simply because I did not know anything about the technicals. 

Then I discovered Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities magazine. 
During my lunch hour, I would take the elevator down to the library and read 
back issues. Although I saw chart patterns in the stocks I bought, I never really 
attached much significance to them. As some of my selections went sour, I 
began to view chart patterns with more respect. The fundamentals always 
looked good, but the technicals were signaling a trend change just as I was 
about to pull the trigger. The stocks I bought either lost money outright or I 
sold them too soon and cut my profits short. 

Perhaps this has happened to you. You do fundamental research on a 
stock and then buy it, only to watch it go nowhere for a year or more. Even 
worse, once you get in, the stock tumbles. Had you looked at the chart the 
answer was always there. Prices pierced a trend line, a head-and-shoulders top 
appeared out of nowhere, the relative strength index signaled an overbought 
situation. In short, any number of technical indicators were screaming that a 
buy now would cost you your shirt. But you never saw the signs. 

You are not alone; I did the same thing for years. I eventually got so 
frustrated with the performance of my stock selections that I decided to do 
my own research on technical analysis. I went to the library and read the same 
thing in many books: A head-and-shoulders formation works most of the time. 
What does that mean? Does it mean they are successful 51% of the time or 
90% of the time? No one had the answer. I was not willing to risk my hard- 
earned dollars on simple bromides. As an engineer I wanted hard, cold facts, 
not fuzzy platitudes. So, I wrote this book. 


Preface to the First Edition xvii 


Book Layout 


At the back of the book is an Index of Chart Patterns. If you suspect your stock 
is making a chart pattern but do not know what to call it, the Index of Chart 
Patterns is the first place to look. Page numbers beside each pattern direct you 
to the associated chapter. 

The chapters are arranged alphabetically in two sections: chart patterns 
and event patterns. Within each chapter, you are first greeted with a “Results 
Snapshot” of the major findings followed by a short discussion. Then, a “Tour” 
invites you to explore the chart pattern. “Identification Guidelines,” in both 
table form and in-depth discussion, make selecting and verifying your choices 
easier. 

No work would be complete without an exploration of the mistakes, and 
the “Focus on Failures” section dissects the cause of failures. The all-important 
“Statistics” section follows. How do you trade a chart pattern? That is what the 
“Trading Tactics” and “Sample Trade” sections explore. The “For Best Perfor- 
mance” section includes a list of tips and observations on how to select better 
performing patterns. 

If you have ever worked on a car or done some woodworking, then you 
will recognize the importance of selecting the right tool for the job. You would 
not want to use a flat-head screwdriver when a Phillips works better. Both do 
the job, but they are hardly interchangeable. Sometimes it is not a screwdriver 
you should be using, but a chisel. Selecting the proper tools and knowing how 
to use them is half the battle. This book is a lot like that, helping to sort the 
wheat from the chaff. Sometimes a chart pattern is frightening enough that 
you will want to take profits. At other times, the best trade that you can make 
is none at all. 

I cannot give you the experience needed to make money in the stock 
market using chart patterns. I can only give you the tools and say, “Go to work 
on paper first.” That is the first step in developing a trading style that works 
for you, one you are comfortable with, one that improves as you do. If you 
review your paper trades, you will understand why a stop-loss order is more 
than a tool for the professionals. You will improve your ability to predict sup- 
port and resistance levels that will, in turn, allow you to tighten your stops and 
get out near the top, cut your losses short, and let your profits run. You will 
understand why the statistics in this book are useful for comparison purposes, 
but your trading results may fall short. You may discover that your girlfriend 
loves diamonds, but as a chart pattern, they are a lousy investment. One word 
says it all. Experience. 

Good luck. 


‘Tuomas N. BuLKowsKI 
December 1999 


Acknowledgments 


Perhaps several times in your life, something occurs that alters its direction. 
That happened to me several years ago when I brashly submitted my first 
article to Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities. Much to my surprise and 
delight, the editor at the time, Thom Hartle, published the work. That single 
event sent me spinning off in a new direction, another career. 

Nearly a dozen articles later, I called Thom and chatted with him about 
an idea for a book. He steered me to Pamela van Giessen at John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., publisher of this book. A single e-mail of my idea to her put a new 
set of wheels in motion. Simple words cannot express my thanks to these two 
outstanding individuals. 

This is a great book made better by the tireless efforts of Bernice Pet- 
tinato of Beehive Production Services. She did more than shepherd a 2,000- 
page manuscript through production. She read it and edited it without dying 
of boredom while making astute suggestions. Simply, she’s the best. Thanks, 
Bernice. 


T.N.B. 


xix 


Contents 


Introduction 1 
1 How to Trade Chart Patterns 9 
2 AB=CD®, Bearish* 27 
3 AB=CD®, Bullish* 36 
4 Bat®, Bearish* 44 
5 Bat®, Bullish* 52 
6 Big M* 60 
7 Big W* 77 
8 Broadening Bottoms 95 
9 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 114 

10 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 132 

11 Broadening Tops 153 

12 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 175 

13 Broadening Wedge, Descending 192 

14 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 208 

15 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 227 

16 Butterfly®, Bearish* 245 

17. Butterfly®, Bullish* 255 

18 Cloudbanks* 263 

19 Crab®, Bearish* 277 

20 Crab®, Bullish* 286 

21 Cup with Handle 294 


Xxi 


xxii 


22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 


Contents 


Cup with Handle, Inverted 
Diamond Bottoms 

Diamond Tops 

Diving Board* 

Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 
Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 
Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 
Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 
Double Tops, Adam & Adam 
Double Tops, Adam & Eve 
Double Tops, Eve & Adam 
Double Tops, Eve & Eve 

Flags 

Flags, High and Tight 

Gaps 

Gartley, Bearish* 

Gartley, Bullish* 
Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 
Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 
Head-and-Shoulders Tops 
Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 
Horn Bottoms 

Horn Tops 

Island Reversals 

Measured Move Down 
Measured Move Up 

Pennants 

Pipe Bottoms 

Pipe Tops 

Rectangle Bottoms 

Rectangle Tops 

Roof* 


Roof, Inverted* 


311 
326 
344 
362 
379 
398 
419 
438 
458 
476 
494 
510 
526 
542 
555 
568 
577 
585 
601 
618 
636 
653 
668 
682 
699 
713 
726 
743 
760 
773 
792 
811 
825 


55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 


Rounding Bottoms 

Rounding Tops 

Scallops, Ascending 

Scallops, Ascending and Inverted 
Scallops, Descending 

Scallops, Descending and Inverted 
Three Falling Peaks 

Three Peaks and Domed House* 
Three Rising Valleys 

Triangles, Ascending 

Triangles, Descending 

Triangles, Symmetrical 

Triple Bottoms 

Triple Tops 

V-Bottoms* 

V-Bottoms, Extended* 

V-Tops* 

V-Tops, Extended* 

Wedges, Falling 

Wedges, Rising 

Wolfe Wave®, Bearish* 

Wolfe Wave®, Bullish* 


Statistics Summary 


Glossary 


Visual Index of Chart Patterns 


* New to this edition 


AB=CD PATTERN, BAT PATTERN, BUTTERFLY PATTERN, CRAB PATTERN are 
registered trademarks of Scott Carney. Wolfe Wave is a registered trademark 
of Bill Wolfe. 


Contents xxiii 


839 
855 
871 
888 
903 
921 
936 
952 
960 
976 
997 
1019 
1040 
1057 
1075 
1089 
1104 
1118 
1131 
1148 
1164 
1174 
1184 
1197 
1212 


Introduction 


Jim is struggling. 

He is the owner of JCB Superstores, and his competitor across town is 
beating him up; there is blood all over Jim’s ledger. He decides it is time to 
take off the gloves: JCB goes public. He uses the money from the initial public 
offering to buy his competitor and add a few more stores around town. 

With a growing sales base, Jim’s clout allows him to negotiate lower 
prices for the office supplies he sells. He passes on part of the savings to his 
customers, while watching his margins widen, and plows the profits back into 
building more stores and updating existing ones. 

Jim calls his friend, Tom, and tells him of his plans to expand the opera- 
tion statewide. They chat for a while and exchange business tactics on how 
best to manage the expansion. When Tom gets off the phone, he decides to 
conduct his own research on JCB. He visits several stores and sees the same 
thing: packed parking lots, people pushing full shopping carts, and lines at the 
checkout counters. 

He questions a few customers to get a sense of the demographics. At a 
few stores, he even chats with suppliers as they unload their wares. Back at the 
office, he does a thorough analysis of the financials and looks at the competi- 
tion. Everything checks out, so he orders his trading partners to buy the stock 
at no higher than $10 a share. 

When news of the expansion plan hits the wires, the Street panics. It is, 
after all, a soft economy, and expanding willy-nilly when a recession looms is 
daft, maybe even criminal, according to some news outlets. The stock drops 
below 10 and Tom’s crew makes its move. They buy as much as they can with- 
out raising suspicion. The stock rises anyway. It goes back up to 11, then 12, 
and rounds over at 13 before heading back down. 

Several months go by, and the economic outlook is as bleak as ever. The 
stock eases down below 10. After Tom checks in with Jim for the latest public 
news, Iom’s team buys more. It is an easy score because investors are willing to 
dump the stock, especially as year-end tax selling approaches. 


2 Introduction 


Six weeks later the company releases the sales numbers for JCB; they are 
better than expected. The stock rises 15% in minutes and closes at 10.75. And 
that is just for starters. Six months later, it’s clear the economy was never in 
danger of entering a recession and everyone sees boom times ahead. 

The stock hits 20. 

Years go by, the stock splits a few times, and the holiday season looms. 
‘Tom interviews a handful of customers leaving JCB Superstores and discovers 
that they are all complaining about the same thing: The advertised goods are 
not on the shelves. 

‘Tom investigates further and discovers a massive distribution problem, 
right at the height of the selling season. JCB has overextended itself; the infra- 
structure is simply not there to support the addition of one new store each week. 

‘Tom realizes it is time to sell. He tells his trading department to dump the 
stock immediately but for no less than 28.25. They liquidate about a third of 
their holdings before driving the stock down below the minimum. 

Since it is the holidays, everyone seems to be in a buying mood. Novice 
investors jump in at what they consider a bargain price. The major brokerage 
houses climb aboard and tout the stock, but Tom knows better. When the stock 
recovers to its old high, his trading partners sell the remainder of their hold- 
ings. The stock tops out and rounds over. During the next month and a half, 
the stock drifts down, slowly, casually. There is no rush for the exits—just a 
slow trickle as the smart money quietly folds up shop and moves on. 

Then news of poor holiday sales leaks out. There is a rumor about distri- 
bution problems, merchandising mistakes, and cash flow problems. Brokerage 
firms that only weeks before were touting the stock now advise their clients to 
sell. The stock plummets 39% overnight. 

One or two analysts say the stock is oversold; it is a bargain and investors 
should add to their positions. Many bottom fishers follow their brokers’ advice 
and buy the stock. Big mistake. The buying enthusiasm pushes the price up 
briefly before a new round of selling takes hold. Each day the stock drops a bit 
lower, nibbling away like waves washing against a castle of sand. In 2 months’ 
time, the stock is down another 30%. 

The following quarter JCB Superstores announces that earnings will 
likely come in well below consensus estimates. The stock drops another 15%. 
The company is trying to correct the distribution problem, but it is not some- 
thing easily fixed. It decides to stop expanding and to concentrate on the prof- 
itability of its existing store base. 

Two years later, Tom pulls up the stock chart. The dog has been flat for 
so long it looks as if its heartbeat has stopped. He calls Jim and chats about the 
outlook for JCB Superstores. Jim gushes enthusiastically about a new retailing 
concept called the Internet. He is excited about the opportunity to sell office 
supplies online without the need for bricks and mortar. There is some risk 
because the online community is in its infancy, but Jim predicts demand will 
expand quickly. Tom is impressed, so he starts doing his homework and is soon 
buying the stock again. 


Introduction 3 


Investment Footprints 


If you picture in your mind the price action of JCB Superstores, you may 
recognize three chart patterns: a double bottom, a double top, and a dead-cat 
bounce. To knowledgeable investors, chart patterns are not squiggles on a price 
chart; they are the footprints left by the smart money. The footprints are all 
they need to follow as they line their pockets with greater and greater riches. 

‘To others, such as Tom, it takes hard work and pavement pounding before 
they dare take a position in a stock. They are the ones making the footprints. 
They are the smart money that is setting the rules of the game—a game any- 
one can play. It is called investing. 

Whether you choose to use technical analysis or fundamental analysis in 
your trading decisions, it pays to know what the market is thinking. It pays to 
look for the footprints. Those footprints may well steer you away from a cliff 
and get you out of a stock just in time. The feet that make those footprints are 
the same ones that will kick you in the pants, waking you up to a promising 
investment opportunity. 

This book gives you the tools to spot the footprints, where they predict 
the stock is heading, how far it will travel, and how reliable the trail really is. 
The tools will not make you rich; tools rarely do. But they are instruments to 
greater wealth. Use them wisely. 


The Database 


Let me tell you about the stocks I used to compile the statistics in this book. 


¢ 1,396 stocks were used; most start in July 1991 and extend into 2020. 

¢ Not all stocks covered the entire period. 

¢ Some stocks no longer trade. It’s important to include what happens 
when a company goes bankrupt or merged out of existence. 

e All stocks use daily price data, not intraday, but some chapters use 
weekly or monthly data. 

¢ Most chart patterns were added in real time as new data arrives each 
day. This avoids look-ahead bias (where I only catalog patterns I can 
see have done well). 

¢ The real-time addition of data was done for more than 20 years. 

e All stocks have been split adjusted unless I no longer actively 
follow them. 

¢ When a new stock is added to the database, it may have been dividend 
adjusted by the data provider. However, I don’t adjust stocks I use in 
my database for dividends. 

¢ A stock becomes part of the database provided it trades above $5 
a share (usually), isn’t thinly traded (I like to see daily volume over 


4 Introduction 


100,000 shares), and the stock has a heartbeat (meaning it has a reason- 
able high-low yearly trading range). 

¢ Market capitalization varies with all three represented (small, medium, 
and large). 

¢ Most stocks chosen are from American companies whose stocks trade 
on the NYSE or NASDAQ exchanges. 


The Sample Trade 


Most of the sample trades included in the chapters of this book are fictitious. 
Each sample trade uses techniques I wanted to illustrate, incorporating ficti- 
tious people in sometimes unusual circumstances. Call it poetic license, but 
I hope they give you some ideas on how to increase your profits or minimize 
your losses. Maybe you'll find them entertaining, too. 


Testing Chart Patterns 


How do you test chart patterns? It’s not an easy question to answer. If you use 
commonly available software that tests trading strategies, you'll enter rules to 
model the shape of a double bottom, for example. When price closes above the 
top of the pattern, it signals an entry, so the software simulates a buy. 

What about the exit signal? When do you sell? Should you use a stop- 
loss order or a signal from MACD or even a moving average crossover? No. 
Why not? Because you’re not testing the chart pattern. You’re testing how 
well a stop-loss order works or you’re testing MACD or the moving average 
crossover system. 

So I invented two tools I call the ultimate high and ultimate low to solve 
the testing problem. 

Let’s look at a chart so I can explain how these work and you'll under- 
stand the statistics in this book. Figure I.1 shows two chart patterns, a double 
bottom and a head-and-shoulders top. Let’s take the double bottom first. 


Trading the Double Bottom 


It appears at AB, two valleys that bottom near the same price. A buy signal 
occurs when price closes above the top of the pattern. The top of the pattern is 
at C and the entry signal (breakout) happens at D when price closes above the 
top of the double bottom. Entry is made the next day using the opening price, 
which is 17.06. 

Let’s say you’re using traditional software and place a stop-loss order a 
penny below the low price of B, which is 15.70. 


Introduction 5 


AES Corp (AES) 


AVE Msmete High) f lis 
I ha f , \ hy A rl Le 
\ Le \ hf = ‘Y 

it | ; 


I Hl 
ae dy ae 16 
mM Fl} ae hh r 
A B 44 dl 
Ne wt 
Lia 
| VV Ht 
\ : -15 
J 
(Ultimate Low) 
19 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov =e 


Figure 1.1 A double bottom signals a trade entry at D and an exit at the ultimate 
high. A head-and-shoulders top signals an entry at | and an exit at the ultimate low. 


The computer watches the stock rise to E and then drop. When it touches 
the stop-loss order at 15.70, which happens at F, it closes out the trade. So this 
trade entered at 17.06, sold at 15.70, and took a loss of $1.36 a share. 

Does this mean the double bottom lost $1.36 a share? No. It means the 
stop-loss order lost that much. You tested the stop-loss order, not the dou- 
ble bottom. 

What do I mean? 

Pretend that when price climbed to E, you raised the stop-loss order to 
17.43 (which is the high price of G). When price dropped to 17.43, the stock 
sold and it handed you a gain this time of 37 cents a share. Did the double bot- 
tom make a profit? No. The stop-loss order did. 

As you move the stop-loss order around, you get different sell prices. 
You're not testing the double bottom. You’re testing how well the stop-loss 
order works at different values. So we haven’t answered the basic question, 
“how do you test chart patterns?” 

Given the same entry signal (17.06), let’s say you traded this stock per- 
fectly. Where would you sell? When price slides below F, you'll be taking a loss 
if you have to sell, so trying to shoot for 19 on the upper right of the chart isn’t 
optimum. The trade goes negative for a while before it shows a profit. 


Ultimate High 


How about selling at E, when price peaks? That would give you the most 
profit before the stock dropped into loss territory. That peak is what I call the 
ultimate high. If you traded this stock perfectly, you’d buy at 17.06, using the 


6 Introduction 


opening price the day after an upward breakout, and you'd sell at the high 
price at E. 

I’m not testing how well a stop-loss order works because I’m not using 
a stop or MACD or a moving average crossover system to find the exit. ’m 
selling at the highest possible price before things go wrong. I’m selling at the 
ultimate high. A perfect double bottom trade. 

How do I automate this? In my software, I use two rules to find the ulti- 
mate high (on a historical price chart, not real time). 


1. Find the highest high before price drops 20%, measured from the high 
to the close. 

2. If price closes below the bottom of the chart pattern, then the search 
for the ultimate high stops, and we use the highest high found after 
entering the trade. 


In this example, the stock drops to F and closes at 15.70. The low at B is 
15.71, so price has closed below the bottom of the pattern at F We use rule 2 
to find the ultimate high: The highest high between the entry price (17.06) and 
F (the bottom of the pattern) is E. E is the ultimate high. 

Let’s pretend the double bottom is much lower so I can tell you how rule 
1 works. Let’s also assume that the close at J is at 13. 

Rule 1 says to look for the highest high before price drops 20%, meas- 
ured from the high to the close. The high between the buy price and J is E, at 
17.80. So we look for price to close 20% below this, or 14.24. When price closes 
at or below 14.24 (again, assuming this happens at J, at 13), we’ve found the 
ultimate high, which is E, at 17.80. So we bought at 17.06 and sold at 17.80 and 
made a profit of 74 cents a share. 

We didn’t use a stop-loss order. We didn’t use MACD or the moving aver- 
age crossover. We executed a perfect trade by buying exactly when we should 
have and selling at the ultimate high. We tested how well the double bottom 
worked if you traded it perfectly. 

And that’s how I measured how bullish chart patterns work. 

Years ago, someone asked me if this was the same as placing a trailing 
stop-loss order 20% below the high price. It’s not. If you did that, you’d be 
stopped out at J (the fictitious one at 13) and not E. 

Incidentally, the 20% value in rule 1 comes from the idea of bull and 
bear markets. A decline of 20% from a high in the market averages means it 
slid into a bear market. A rise of 20% off a market low means it entered bull 
market territory. I applied that idea to individual stocks when searching for the 
ultimate high and low. 


Ultimate Low 


Finding the ultimate low for bearish chart patterns works similarly. Let’s take 
the example of the head-and-shoulders top at GEH. We see the left shoulder 


Introduction 7 


at G, the head at E, and the right shoulder at H. Price confirms the pattern 
when price closes below the neckline. Because the neckline slopes downward 
in this example (not shown), I recommend entering the trade when price closes 
below the right armpit, which I show as the horizontal line at I. You’d short at 
the open the next day. 

If you can program your computer to find head-and-shoulders tops, that’s 
how you enter a trade. Nothing magical here. 

What about the exit signal? Again, we could use a stop-loss order, but we 
already know that’s not going to work from our previous example. We’d be 
testing various locations of the stop and not the chart pattern. So let’s find the 
ultimate low. 

‘Two rules: 


1. Find the lowest low before price rises 20%, measured low to close. 

2. If price closes above the top of the chart pattern, then the search for 
the ultimate low ends, and we use the lowest low found after entering 
the trade. 


In this case, price breaks out downward from the head-and-shoulders top, 
drops to J, and then rises. The low at] is 14.60, so a 20% rise is 17.52. A close 
at 17.52 or higher will end the search for the ultimate low. 

When price closes at K (at or above 17.52), the search for the ultimate 
low is over. We’ve found the ultimate low, which is J. 

If K was a bit higher, then rule 2 would come into play. That’s because 
price would close above the top of the head-and-shoulders, stopping the search 
for the ultimate low. 

In this example, we are trading this head-and-shoulders perfectly. We 
are entering the trade at the opening price the day after a downward break- 
out, and we are closing it out at the ultimate low, the lowest low before price 
rises. A perfect trade. We are testing how well this chart pattern works. We’re 
not testing stop-loss order placement or MACD or a moving average crosso- 
ver scheme. 

The performance of most of the chart patterns in this book follows these 
two ideas: the ultimate high and the ultimate low. For bullish patterns, I look 
for the ultimate high. For bearish patterns, I look for the ultimate low. 


Chart Pattern Failures 


Once you understand what a perfect trade means, you can look for failures. 
What does it mean when a chart pattern fails? To answer that, I had to invent a 
new concept, which I call the breakeven failure rate or the 5% failure rate. Those 
two phrases are synonyms. All I did was count how many chart patterns failed 
to see price rise or decline more than 5%. 


8 Introduction 


In a bull market, for example, I found that 18.8% of head-and-shoulders 
top patterns failed to see price drop more than 5%. If your cost of trading is 
5%, then you'll know that nearly 20% of head-and-shoulders you trade, if you 
trade them perfectly and often enough, will fail to cover your costs. 


Realistic? 


So there you have it. Once you understand that I’m measuring performance 
from the breakout price to the ultimate high or low, then you’ll understand 
most of the statistics in this book. You’ll understand that the performance 
numbers are based on perfect trades, made hundreds or even thousands of times 
to arrive at the average rise or decline I show in Table x.2 (where x is the chap- 
ter number). 

Are the results realistic? Not really. You likely won’t be able to duplicate 
them in real life. You might do better or worse, depending on your skill and luck. 

The double bottom example entered the trade the day after the breakout. 
If you placed a buy stop a penny above the top of the double bottom, you’d be 
entering at a better price (most of the time, based on my tests) than using the 
opening price the day after the breakout. 

So you could do better than the numbers shown in this book. All you have 
to do is find the price of the ultimate high, weather the 20% drop, wait for a 
recovery, and sell at a price above the ultimate high. People who buy and hold 
do that all of the time. 

For traders, though, it’s more difficult. Finding the ultimate high in real 
time (as it’s happening) is challenging. That’s why people like me write these 
types of books. 


1 


How to Trade 
Chart Patterns 


This book will help you identify dozens of chart pattern types. It will also do 
what no other book does: tell you how chart patterns have performed, over 
three decades, using statistics from hundreds or even thousands of samples. 

That’s not enough. That information won’t make you a successful trader, 
but it will give you an edge over other traders. What’s missing? 

Experience. 

If you have enough experience trading stocks, you should be able to look 
at a chart and determine whether it’s time to buy, sell, or stay in cash. That’s 
not as difficult as it seems. 

When you look at a chart, look for a bullish chart pattern, such as a dou- 
ble bottom. If you find one that confirms as a valid chart pattern, then it’s 
time to buy. 

A confirmed double top means it’s time to sell. If you do nothing else 
except trade those two chart patterns, you could make money. Buy when a 
double bottom appears (or any bullish pattern) and sell when a double top 
confirms (or any bearish chart pattern). The ride between those two might be 
bumpy, so you'll need to know how to use a stop-loss order. 

Add bells and whistles—such as making sure the market is trending 
upward and the industry to which the stock belongs is also trending upward— 
and you'll have a smoother ride. Having both of those on your side increases 
your chance of a successful trade. Complete the picture with a bullish stock 
aching to rise, and you’re good to go. [’ll discuss this setup later in this chapter. 

Let me share with you a few ideas on how I make my trading choices. I'll 
tell you about a few swing trading setups that work and then discuss the win- 
ners of performance contests. 


Bottom Fishing, Buy the Dip 


When I have cash I want to put to work in the stock market, I’ll flip through 
600 charts on my computer, looking for anything that interests me (that takes 
less than an hour unless I find something interesting). Figure 1.1 shows a 
weekly chart that caught my attention. Why? 


10 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


Lamar Advertising (LAMR) 


fi : 


M J S 14M J S 15M J S 16M J S 17M J} S 18M J} S 19M JS 


Figure 1.1. The pattern at A and B leads to a strong move higher. 


Before I answer that, let me say that I prefer to bottom fish for stocks. 
That is, I prefer to buy low and sell high. I’m more successful at bottom fishing 
than momentum trading (buy high, sell higher). 

Ideally, a bottom fishing expedition will yield an investment that turns 
into a momentum play when the stock soars and continues well into the 
stratosphere. 

Some will claim that bottom fishing is a risky play, and they are right. 
But I argue that momentum trading is even riskier. Only you can decide which 
practice is best suited for your trading style. I use both, but I prefer fishing 
because as my portfolio has grown in size, I don’t need to trade as much. I can 
devote my time to /iving instead of playing video games watching candlesticks 
form on the 5-minute scale. 

Returning to the figure, the stock started out low on the left of the chart 
and climbed to the right, doubling in value. If you were to ride this chart like a 
rollercoaster, you might exit the ride and stumble around, feeling queasy. 

When I looked at Figure 1.1, I wasn’t thinking of buying the dip, but 
that’s what I saw. Price moved horizontally at A (if you ignore the few down- 
ward price spikes, the bottom of the portion is reasonably flat) followed by a 
strong and quick plunge to B. After B, the stock recovered quickly to C and 
bobbled up and down, eventually rising into the clouds at D. 

I put the chart aside and flipped to the next stock that caught my atten- 
tion. Figure 1.2 shows what I found (weekly chart, again). My software (which 
I wrote) groups charts by industry so I can get a sense of how the indus- 
try is behaving. I had moved from advertising (Figure 1.1) to airline stocks 
(Figure 1.2). 


Bottom Fishing, Buy the Dip 11 


Boeing Company, The (BA) ¢ 


Hh 387 
Hay We 


a 225 
id ie 
? 
je 1B 
aa 153 
; pros {r, Na 144 
th da 135 
tJ 4 pei 
it wrt yt Mary 126 
| rs 117 
108 
My 
en B 99 
f 90 
“ 
! 81 
Lad 72 
M J S 14M J S 15M J S 16M J S 17M J S 18M J} S 19M J 5S 


Figure 1.2 Adiving board on the weekly scale leads to the stock climbing strongly. 


There’s the same pattern shown on this chart! 

Point A is a flat base, lasting a long time (over 2 years). A plunge fol- 
lows, taking the stock down fast to B, and then it recovers. This time, the 
stock zipped up (B to C) but went sideways in 2016 for about 6 months (C) 
before taking off and flying to D in a nice straight-line run that saw the stock 
triple in price. 

The stock moved sideways again at E (another flat base, but shorter), 
dropped to F (not a fast drop), and soared to G. The EFG move is a pattern 
similar to the prior two (this chart and the prior figure), but not as clean look- 
ing nor as successful. 

The pattern in Figure 1.1 happened in 2013-2014. Pattern AB (Figure 1.2) 
happened in 2013-2016, and pattern EF occurred in 2018. In other words, Pm 
finding the same pattern in different years, which is a good thing (potentially 
different market conditions). Flat base, sudden drop, and fast move higher: 
Could this be a winning setup that’s worked for years? 

After finding a number of these patterns, I hunted for those that failed to 
perform as expected. Figure 1.3 shows an example of a failure (weekly chart). 
Notice that the flat base at A started in late 2014, the same as the other two 
charts. Price moved horizontally at A, dropped swiftly to B, and recovered but 
only to C before it tumbled to make a lower low at D. After D, though, the 
stock did take flight and delivered (a pun on the package delivery service, in 
case you missed it), which was reassuring if you buy and hold but terrifying for 
a swing or position trader who bought before C. 

I looked for other examples and eventually catalogued my results. The 
research led to a pattern I call a diving board. I hunt for it on the weekly scale, 
but I’ve noticed variations of this pattern on the daily charts, too. 


12 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


FedEx (FDX) 


AM “ 
f i 210 
| Avil? i. 
Aw, . . i se 
fH ys ry Ni Me 

: {" il! | i 
xt ji 1 Of I 38 
# Va H \y 30 


D 18 


y 
“i i 06 
‘Ww : 
M J oS 


14M J) S 15M J S 16M J S 17M J} S 18M J} S 19M JS 


Figure 1.3. This diving board fails to act as expected. 


As you look at the three charts, there are differences and there are simi- 
larities between them. What’s important to performance? Is it the length of 
the pattern, how far price drops after the flat base, the industry the stock is 
a member of, or the time of year (seasonality or even bull/bear market)? By 
looking at a number of charts (and with the help of this book), you can answer 
those questions and become a more successful trader. 


Daily Chart Setup 


Figure 1.4 shows the same pattern in the advertising industry (which is suspi- 
cious because it’s the same industry as Figure 1.1) but a different period (2018). 
The large breakaway gap up in early November (A) was because of third quar- 
ter results, which the market liked (hence the bullish gap). After that, price 
moved horizontally at B and made a strong push lower to C, followed by a 
headline-fetching rise up to G. 

Along the way, earnings came out and helped momentum push the stock 
up (D and E). Near the top, earnings at F sent the stock lower, but only for 
a day. Perhaps the weak quarter was a warning of a coming trend change. 
At H, the market disliked earnings and seemed to confirm an end to the upward 
move, at least for a time. 

I visited the company’s website and found a headline for I (near the diving 
board), titled, “UBS Global Media and Communications Conference” web- 
cast. I didn’t listen to the broadcast, but the stock turned sharply lower a few 
days later, making a straight-line run down to C. I don’t know if the webcast 
was the cause of the decline or what happened to send the stock skittering to C. 


Another Setup 13 


Outfont Media (OUT) 


G 
yetif™ se 27 
a mn P 

cL MY 1 l 
pony rm 
obi 


18 = Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr = May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 1.4 This diving board is on the daily chart. 


If you owned this stock at the time, it would have been wonderful if you knew 
the cause of the drop (from I to C). 

This chart, on the daily scale, is similar to Figures 1.1 and 1.2. You can use 
these historical charts to formulate how to trade the pattern. If you can time 
your entry near C, then you can ride price back up to the base of the diving 
board (B). 

You can wait for price to close above the highest peak at B and ride price 
upward to G. Below the bottom of the diving board (B) provides a good stop 
location, too. 

The ride upward to G may not be as smooth as shown on this chart or 
in Figure 1.2 as price climbs from C to D. It might be as treacherous as the 
climb to D in Figure 1.1. When I look at this chart, though, I see dollar signs 
in the form of profit. All you have to do is find this pattern and have the cour- 
age to trade it. 


Another Setup 


Figure 1.5 shows another setup but one you should avoid (at least from the 
bullish side). The setup begins with price making a strong push higher, often 
in a straight-line run (but be flexible as in this example). I show that upward 
move at A and then B. The uptrend lasts several months and takes price from 
about 9 to 13 (which means, a good rise). 

Price moves horizontally at C as if trying to catch its breath (ignore the 
downward February spike at C). The horizontal move should be proportional 
to the AB move. If AB shows a breathtaking rise, then expect C to be a long 


14 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


American Equity Investment Life Holding (AEL) 


ful iby ii il \ WA A ; 
Mit AN 
i f 
Cr a 3 
| hr iy Pa 
i | ' "i . - y it \ ‘ 
a ii 
“a \ \ 9 
10 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 11 Feb Mar Apr = May Jun Jul Aug Sep , 7 


Figure 1.5 This U-shaped pattern delivers a failure. 


horizontal move while the bulls and bears regroup. In this example, AB is about 
4 months long and C is 6 months long. 

After the topping pattern (C), price forms a chart pattern just below the 
base of the peak. I show that pattern at DE (a double bottom). The double bot- 
tom confirms at F when the doji (hard to see) closes above the top of the peak 
between valley’s D and E. Price climbs only to G before reversing. 

After G, the stock drops all the way to H. Traders expecting the double 
bottom to deliver profits to their wallet find holes in their pockets and the 
money gone. 

I see this setup a lot. Price moves up, goes horizontal, and then a chart 
pattern appears (which can be any bullish pattern, like head-and-shoulders 
bottom, double bottom, or triple bottom). The pattern confirms as valid and 
price rises some before reversing and heading lower. The pattern busts its 
upward breakout, handing bulls a loss. 

Just recognizing the double bottom (DE) as a tradable pattern isn’t 
enough. If you research the setup by looking at other charts, you’ll see how 
this setup can lead to a failure of a chart pattern. 

This (the double bottom, or head-and-shoulders, or any bullish pattern at 
the end of the horizontal top) is a setup you’ll want to avoid. 


Pothole Setup 


Figure 1.6 shows a rare setup on the weekly chart, but it’s a variation of the 
pattern shown in the prior figure. 


Pothole Setup 15 


A Alcoa (AA) 


hi, ve 
"hy meh | i/ : 
| Ih ‘ys i oa th Ly % 


4 yy i / 24 


M J s 12. M J s 13M = > 14M J S 


Figure 1.6 A pothole setup happens after a drop and flat base. 


The company runs into trouble that lasts for the long term (months). 
That trouble takes price down from A to bottom at B. At B, the bears want to 
see the stock continue to drop, but bottom fishers like me see a good value. 
Buying demand keeps the stock from dropping much farther. A stalemate 
emerges with neither the bulls nor the bears winning, so the stock just lines 
sideways (the B to C move). 

If the B to C move represents a highway, then CD is a pothole. It’s a bear 
trap, though. Price drops to C and makes another bottom at D, forming a dou- 
ble bottom in this example. The CD move can represent any bullish pattern, 
like a head-and-shoulders bottom or triple bottom. Anyway, price climbs out 
of the hole and climbs and climbs and climbs (EF). 

If you’re lucky, the stock will rise like it did here, but don’t depend on 
that happening. I also find this example suspicious because it happens in 2013- 
2014, the same period as Figure 1.3. Still, it provides the template for the 
pothole setup. 

The key to this pattern is the stock forming a bottom (flat base) followed 
by a pothole. Make sure the flat base appears after a downtrend. You don’t 
want to go long if price trends up into the pattern (like Figure 1.5). See if you 
can find a reason why the stock wants to climb (during E in Figure 1.6). The 
reason could be a good quarter with a positive future outlook issued by the 
company. Maybe the cost of ingredients is going down or the company can 
raise prices on the goods they sell because the market for widgets is firming up. 

If you look back at the figures in this chapter, they all have a flat base, a 
period of time where the stock goes horizontal. After that horizontal move, 
a pattern appears. In the first four figures, price drops (after the horizontal 


16 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


move). In the last two figures, a double bottom reversal sends price higher, at 
least for a time. 

If you research these setups (that is, find examples in the stocks you trade), 
that will give you the confidence to trade a similar setup when it appears in a 
stock you’d like to own. 

Here’s another idea to help ease the research burden. 


Patternz 


I wrote pattern finding software for Windows that I call Patternz and made it 
available for free to download and use (visit my website: www. ThePatternSite. 
com). One of the things it does is simulate trades. I load up a bunch of stocks, 
tell it to find double bottoms (as an example, but they happen often), and let 
the program find them. Then I look at the context: the double bottom in the 
surrounding price landscape. Pll guess whether to make the trade or stay in 
cash, and then let the stock play out. It’s like day trading on the 1 millisecond 
scale (you control playback speed). In seconds, I’ll know whether the trade 
made money or not. 

What I’m doing is training my brain not only to view the chart pattern, 
but to get a feel for the conditions where the pattern will thrive or fail. It’s an 
easy way to train your brain to recognize winning and losing setups. 

Suppose you find a stock showing a chart pattern you wish to buy. Spend 
an hour searching for similar setups using the Patternz simulator and you'll be 
able to tell whether your trade will /ikely work or not. 

It’s easy to find chart patterns. The Patternz software will find them for 
me. But having the experience to know whether they will work is what sepa- 
rates a seasoned professional from amateurs. 

Amateurs are the ones paying for the dreams of the professionals. Stop 
giving away your money. Take the time to do the research to discover when a 
chart pattern will work and when it won’t. Then put that knowledge to use to 
fill your wallet or purse. 

That’s how you trade chart patterns and make money doing it. 


Another Way 


I mentioned this setup in the introduction to this chapter. Look for a 
bullish pattern and buy it when it confirms. Sell when a bearish pattern 
appears. For example, Figure 1.7 shows a double bottom at AB. The two 
valleys bottom near the same price. The squiggles turn into an actual dou- 
ble bottom when price closes above the horizontal line. That happens at 


Another Way 17 


3D Systems (DDD) E E 
3% , ae a 
y i a | yt 
7 ‘ in i 
‘ im) 
™y, Hi 
ue f ay ‘yl sh 
‘ i “hy rT] oth | vals 
I ' 4 +4 lie 
oo "i 
1D 
| i n Le 
"yt 
AB 
19 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 20 Feb Mar 5 


Figure 1.7 Here is a swing trade using a double bottom and a double top. 


C (the breakout). The next day, D, you buy the stock at the opening price 
and receive a fill of 7.40. 

From then on, you look for a bearish pattern, one that says the stock is 
going down. A double top appears at EF. The two peaks top out near the same 
price. It confirms as a valid double top when price closes below the horizontal 
line, G. The next day, you sell your shares at the open and receive a fill at 10.60. 
The difference is $3.20 or 43% above the buy price. 

In fact, if you had spotted an earlier double top (1), you could have sold a 
day after the downward breakout (J) and received a slightly better fill, at 11.00, 
for a net gain on the trade of 49%. 

If you sold the day after J, you might be kicking yourself for selling too 
soon. Why? Because price continued to rise to E and higher to F. If you were 
astute, you may have recognized a 2B pattern at F and sold sooner, making 
even more money. Don’t look for the 2B pattern in this book because I don’t 
review it. Visit my website for details if you’re interested in the 2B. 

Of course, I cherry picked this trade, and often things aren’t as easy as this 
example suggests. But the idea is simple. Buy bullish patterns and sell bearish 
ones. Yes, you’ll have to find stocks that you believe show promise in an indus- 
try doing well and during a rising market (you will want the stock, industry, 
and market trending in the same direction for the best result). 

You may want to score the chart pattern, too. I described the scoring 
mechanism in my second book, Trading Classic Chart Patterns. A review of the 
technique over a decade later shows it still works well. It will help you select 
patterns that perform better and avoid the duds. 


18 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


Knots and Swing Trading Pullbacks 


Let’s dig in and discuss some swing trading setups. Figure 1.8 shows what I 
call a knot. It’s a useful way of detecting when a pullback will start and at what 
price. It’s ideal for swing traders who want to make money when price breaks 
out downward from a chart pattern in its initial push lower. 

Let’s look at Steelcase on the left of the figure. A double top forms at AB 
and confirms at C when price closes below the horizontal line. How low will 
the stock drop in its initial descent? 

Answer: to the knot at D. I define a knot as a place in a strong trend (E to 
A in this example) where price moves sideways for at least 3 days. When it’s the 
first knot closest to the double bottom (the first location of support, really, below 
the pattern’s breakout), expect the stock to bottom there and begin a pullback. 

In this example, knot D is the first support area below C. Price reaches 
the area at F and begins to pull back to the price of C. 

In my experience with knots, I know to place an order to close out the 
trade at the top of the knot, not the middle or bottom. Sometimes, price touches 
the top of the knot and reverses. At other times, the stock drops like we see 
here at F before reversing. 


Setup 2 


Let’s take the case on the far right of the figure (“Setup 2”). In the rise from I 
to H, there is no knot of support. The uphill move is fast and long. 

The way to trade this is to split the move in half and place an order to 
close out the trade there. In this example, midway up the run from I to H is J. 


Steelcase (SCS) 


f 
aif if i ; Pallant 


F 
} 15 
Setup 3 Setup 2 


Apr 2019 May Jun Jul 


Figure 1.8 Shown are three ways to trade a pullback. 


Knots and Throwbacks 19 


Place an order to cover a short at J. After the double top FG confirms when 
price closes below H, price drops to K before beginning a pullback. 

You don’t see this setup often because there is usually a knot along the 
uphill run from I to H, but it does happen. Take advantage of it and expect the 
stock to find support midway in the I to H run like it does here at J. 

If the run does show a knot but it looks too far below the chart pattern, 
then split the run in half like I’ve explained. In technical terms, if support is 
too far away, then price will reverse closer to the chart pattern. What is closer? 
Most pullbacks bottom in the 7% to 8% range. If a knot is 10% or 15% away, 
then that’s too far unless there’s a fundamental reason to drive price down hard 
and fast (bad earnings, bad future outlook, that kind of thing). 

If the move from I to H is exceptionally long, you might want to split the 
run into thirds and place a trading order a third of the way down to I from H. 
Search for other stocks showing the same pattern and see where they turn. The 
Patternz simulator can make the search easy. 


Setup 3 


Another setup is similar to Setup 2 except there’s support between J and H, but 
not in the same upward trend. Let’s rewind the tape and start at the beginning. 

Imagine that the line separating Setup 3 from Setup 2 is missing. We see 
a strong move higher from I to H. We could take half that move and assume 
price is going to drop back to that area, just as we did in Setup 2. However, 
looking to the left of I, we see peak L. It’s a mean-looking knot of support with 
price going horizontal for a week or two (but need not be that extensive; a 
simple well-defined top can do). 

Instead of using Setup 2 to place the exit trade midway at J, it’s more 
likely that the stock will drop to the price of L and reverse there. So L is our 
target. We place a stop a penny above G, place our order to short a penny 
below the price of H, and use the top of L as the exit. 


Knots and Throwbacks 


Figure 1.9 shows two more scenarios for swing trading the stock. The left 
panel shows a double bottom at AB, confirmed when price closes above C. As 
a swing trader, you don’t want to wait to buy into this situation, so you place a 
buy stop a penny above C. That gets you into the trade right on time. 

How far will price rise? Answer: to D. That's the first knot. The knot is the 
closest region to the breakout where price moves horizontally for at least 3 days. 
That horizontal movement is obvious because it rests in the circle to the left of D. 

D is your short-term swing target. The stock will rise and hit that region 
and likely turn back to the breakout in a throwback (which it did in this exam- 
ple, after reaching E). 


20 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


American Financial Group (AFG) Chicos FAS Inc. (CHS) 


fet 
Won 


9 
AB 10 Nov Dec Jan 11 Feb Mar Apr 


N 


Figure 1.9 Here are two setups that work well for swing trading throwbacks. 


You can set a limit order to sell at the top of the knot, but the bottom of 
the knot works better (less risky). In this case, it did work better when the rise 
to E triggered the order and sold the position. You don’t make a lot of money 
trading the throwback (7% or 8%), so you might have to increase the position 
size to make it worthwhile. Do place a stop-loss order a penny below the lower 
of the two bottoms (below A in this case). 


Setup 2 


The prior setup captures the run up to the throwback. What if you want to 
capture more of an advance? This is a more risky setup, but it also works well. 
Look for the second higher knot. I show that at F. That’s your target. 

In this case, the knot is composed of peaks, a ragged top with price spik- 
ing upward. Price also moves sideways here for at least 3 days, with lots of 
overlap, so it’s a good area of overhead resistance. 

The stock recovers from the throwback and rises to G where it hits resist- 
ance setup by the second, higher knot, F. After that, price struggles to push 
through that resistance but eventually does in this example. 


Setup 3 


The right half of the figure shows a similar setup. A small double bottom is at 
HI, confirmed when price closes above J (it’s hard to see where that is, though). 
In this setup, we have a measured move down pattern from L to K (first leg), 
K is the corrective phase, and KH is the second leg. 


Performance Contests 21 


We know from studying measured moves that price returns to the cor- 
rective phase 77% of the time (see Table 46.5, where 23% remain below the 
corrective phase and 77% move higher). We know price is going to climb to 
K. K becomes our target. We use a buy stop a penny above the high at J, a limit 
order to sell at K, and place a stop a penny below the low at H. 

Test these setups in the stocks and markets you trade. Make adjustments 
accordingly so that they work for your trading style. 


Performance Contests 


Imagine Dave likes to bowl and he plays three games per match. Over a month 
he competes five times and wins three out of five matches with one tie. If 
we tally his win/loss record not for the 15 individual games, but for the five 
matches, we find he wins 75% of the time (three of four contests with one tie). 
We might conclude that he’s a good bowler or those competing against him 
are not. I built the following tables just like I described with Dave. They show 
how often an aspect of a chart pattern leads to better or worse performance. 

Table 1.1: Reversals versus Continuations shows the results of the 
first contest: Which types of patterns perform better, those acting as reversals 
or continuations? Before I answer that, what is a reversal and a continuation? 

A pattern acting as a reversal happens when price enters and exits a chart 
pattern from different directions (down going into the pattern and exiting out 
the top, or rising into a pattern and breaking out downward). Patterns acting 
as continuations see price enter and exit the chart pattern in the same direc- 
tion (down going into the pattern and breaking out downward, or rising into a 
pattern and exiting upward). 

For example, Figure 1.7 shows double bottom AB acting as a reversal 
because price drops into the pattern and leaves it going upward. The down- 
trend reverses. The rectangle at C in Figure 1.2 is a continuation pattern. Price 
rises into the start of the rectangle (from B) and exits out the top. That is, price 
continues in the direction of the prevailing price trend. 


Table 1.1 
Reversals (R) versus Continuations (C) 
Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 
Winner Reversals (55%) Reversals (73%) 
Performance 43% R, 42% C 30% R, 26% C 
Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 
Winner Continuations (87%) Continuations (75%) 


Performance -14% R, -16% C -22% R, -23% C 


22 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


Winner. Table 1.1 tells us that reversals work best after upward break- 
outs and continuations work best after downward breakouts. For example, I 
found 55% of chart patterns acting as reversals outperformed continuation 
patterns in bull markets after upward breakouts. Almost all (87%) of the chart 
patterns after downward breakouts in bull markets showed patterns acting as 
continuations beating those which acted as reversals. 

Performance. This line in the table shows the average gain or loss for the 
contests. For example, reversals in bull markets after upward breakouts gained 
43%. Continuation patterns saw price rise 42%. Notice that the differences 
between the contests are often narrow. Continuations, for example, lead by 
one or two percentage points. The narrow lead is a warning that the indicator 
is weak as a predictor of future performance. 

Table 1.2: Height. Do tall patterns outperform short ones? Tall or short 
is a measure of the height of the chart pattern divided by the breakout price. 

Winner. This line shows how chart pattern performance varies with 
height. I contend that tall patterns outperform short ones, and we find that 
belief is true in all market conditions and breakout directions. For exam- 
ple, tall patterns win all of the contests (100%) after downward breakouts in 
bull markets. 

Performance. The performance averages are wide, too, with tall patterns 
gaining an average of 46% and short ones gaining just 39% (bull market, up 
breakout). I believe height is a key indicator of future performance, so you'll 
want to trade tall patterns and avoid short ones. 

Table 1.3: Width. Do wide patterns outperform short ones? I measure 
width from the start to the end of the pattern. 

Winner. The numbers in the table tell how well width works as an indi- 
cator of chart pattern performance. Contests from patterns in bull markets 
perform better when they are wide. Bear market patterns show a tie. 

Performance. Most performance differences are marginal (one or two 
percentage points). For example, after downward breakouts in bear markets, 
wide patterns see price drop 23% on the way to the ultimate low, but narrow 
ones see price drop an average of 22%. Thus, width is not a strong predictor of 
performance, but it can give you an edge in bull markets (where performance 
differences are wider). 


Table 1.2 
Height: Tall (T) versus Short (S) 
Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 
Winner Tall (89%) Tall (89%) 
Performance 46% T, 39% S 30% T, 25% S 
Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 
Winner Tall (100%) Tall (87%) 


Performance -17% T, -13% S -23% T, -21% S 


Performance Contests 23 


Table 1.3 
Width: Wide (W) versus Narrow (N) 
Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 
Winner Wide (81%) Tie (50%) 
Performance 45% W, 40% N 28% W, 27% N 
Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 
Winner Wide (85%) Tie (50%) 
Performance -16% W, -14% N —23% W, -22% N 
Table 1.4 
Breakout Day Gap (G) versus No Gap (N) 
Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 
Winner Gap (68%) Tie (50%) 
Performance 45% G, 42% N 28% G, 28% N 
Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 
Winner Gap (85%) Gap (57%) 
Performance -16% G, -15% N -23% G, -22% N 


Table 1.4: Breakout day gap. Do gaps that occur on the day of breakout 
help performance? 

Winner, Performance. After downward breakouts in bull markets, I 
found that 85% of the chart pattern types showed a gap helping performance. 
The chart patterns dropped an average of 16% versus 15% for those not show- 
ing a breakout gap. 

Notice that the percentages on the performance line are close, suggesting 
gaps are not a strong performance indicator, either. Because I measure per- 
formance using the opening price the day after the breakout day gap, you can 
participate in the better performance that a gap may provide. 

Table 1.5: Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks are 
features I love. When they appear, they invariably hurt performance. The table 
shows the blood. A throwback happens after an upward breakout from a chart 
pattern when price soars but then returns to the breakout price (or comes close 
to it) within a month. Pullbacks are the same except the breakout is downward. 

Winner, Performance. For example, 97% of the time I found that 
throwbacks hurt performance after upward breakouts in bull markets. In con- 
tests of patterns with downward breakouts in bear markets, all of them (100%) 
showed that pullbacks hurt performance. The average decline of those contests 
was 26% for those patterns not showing a pullback (N) and 20% for those that 
did pull back (P). For a downward breakout, that’s a wide difference. 


24 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


Table 1.5 
Throwbacks (T) and Pullbacks (P) versus None (N) 

Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 
Winner Throwbacks (97%) Throwbacks (89%) 
Performance 40% T, 48% N 25% T, 33% N 
Occurrence 64% 65% 

Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 
Winner Pullbacks (91%) Pullbacks (100%) 
Performance -14% P, -17% N -20% P, -26% N 
Occurrence 64% 63% 


Occurrence. The Occurrence line in the table shows how often a throw- 
back or pullback occurred, on average. Throwbacks and pullbacks happen 
almost two out of three times (63% to 65%). 

Table 1.6: Rising or falling volume. The table shows how patterns 
behave if volume is rising or falling from the start of the pattern to the end, 
found using linear regression. 

Winner. For upward breakouts, performance improves just over 60% of 
the time if volume is rising. Downward breakouts are mixed with bull markets 
in patterns showing falling volume doing best but bear markets show a tie. 

Performance. The performance numbers are close, though, especially 
for downward breakouts. For example, patterns with rising volume (R) saw 
price climb 44% to the ultimate high (bull market, up breakout). Patterns with 
falling volume (F) showed gains averaging 42%. The volume trend is not a 
good predictor of future performance. 

I think technical analysts put too much emphasis on volume. (Consider 
that for every share sold, one is bought. If institutions are selling massive 
amounts of shares, then other institutions are buying those shares.) 

Table 1.7: Heavy versus light breakout day volume. I compared 
breakout day volume with the prior month. 


Table 1.6 
Rising (R) versus Falling (F) Volume 
Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 
Winner Rising (62%) Rising (61%) 
Performance 44% R, 42% F 29% R, 27% F 
Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 
Winner Falling (56%) Tie (50%) 


Performance -15% R, -15% F -22% R, —-22% F 


Performance Contests 25 


Table 1.7 
Heavy (H) versus Light (L) Breakout Day Volume 

Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 
Winner Heavy (79%) Heavy (79%) 
Performance 43% H, 41% L 29% H, 26% L 

Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 
Winner Heavy (67%) Light (55%) 
Performance -15% H, -15% L -22% H, -22% L 


Winner, Performance. The table shows that heavy breakout day volume 
suggests better performance most of the time. For example, I found that 79% 
of the time after upward breakouts in bear markets, high volume led to better 
performance by 29% (for heavy volume) versus gains averaging 26% for 
patterns with light breakout day volume. 

You will notice that the percentage difference is not great, especially 
after downward breakouts (which show ties). Breakout volume is not as good a 
predictor of performance as many believe. 

Table 1.8: Trend change. This table is different from the others. It shows 
how often price continues rising or falling more than 20% after the breakout. 
My thinking is that if a chart pattern shows large post-breakout moves, then it 
should be easier to make money trading them. Conversely, a pattern that has 
lots of small moves may be difficult to trade profitably. 

Occurrence. Only in bull markets do the majority (55%) of chart pattern 
types see price rise more than 20%. The worst performance (28%) comes 
from chart pattern types with downward breakouts in bull markets. That poor 
performance makes intuitive sense because the market trend is upward but the 
breakout is downward. It’s like swimming against the current, so you’d expect 
the swimmer to struggle. 

Notice that downward breakouts in bear markets place second (49%). 
It’s another indication that trading with the trend (upward breakouts in bull 
markets and downward breakouts in bear markets) leads to better performance. 


Table 1.8 
Trend Change 
Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 
Occurrence 55% 46% 
Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 


Occurrence 28% 49% 


26 How to Trade Chart Patterns 


Table 1.9 
Single Busted Patterns (S) versus Proxy (P) 


Bull Market, Up Breakout Bear Market, Up Breakout 


Winner Single bust (97%) Single bust (75%) 
Performance —22% S, -15% P -24% S, -22% P 
Single bust occurrence 53% 76% 


Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 


Winner Single bust (94%) Single bust (79%) 
Performance 53% S, 41% P 40% S, 28% P 
Single bust occurrence 70% 63% 


Table 1.9: Single busted patterns versus proxy. The final table in this 
chapter shows how well busted patterns perform against non-busted ones. 

Winner. Single busted patterns outperform their non-busted counterparts 
a good portion of the time. That’s especially true for chart patterns in bull 
markets. They win more than 90% of the contests. Bear markets also win 
contests, but at a more sedate pace. 

Performance. I compared the performance of single busted patterns 
with their proxy (P), the non-busted pattern. In most cases, the performance 
difference is quite wide. 

For example, in bear markets after downward breakouts, single busted 
patterns with downward breakouts saw price rise an average of 40% above the 
top of the chart pattern. The non-busted patterns saw price climb just 28%, 
on average. 

Occurrence. This line tells how often a single busted pattern happens 
(versus double or more than two busts). The higher the number, the easier it’ll 
be to trade a busted pattern that wins big. That means you are more likely to 
trade a single busted pattern than a pattern that double or triple+ busts. 

Bull markets with upward breakouts show fewer single busts (53%) than 
the others. I think that’s because when the pattern busts, price will be heading 
lower and that’s going against the bullish current. It invites a double bust. 

The chapters that follow look at individual chart patterns. I use statistics 
to help discover how they behave, and I share my findings with you. 


2 


AB=CD®, Bearish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: A three-leg zigzag pattern with two turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 


Downward Moves 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance rank 5 (worst) out of 5 3 out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 26.3% 10.2% 
Average drop -12.7% 21.6% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Point D reversal rate 32% 38% 
How many reach point D? 95% 285 
See also Bearish bat, bearish butterfly, bearish crab, bearish 


Gartley, measured move up 


You'll need a computer to find this pattern unless you’re incredibly fast 
with a calculator and have lots of time to waste searching for the thing. If you 
have access to a computer with pattern recognition software, then this pattern 
is as plentiful as hair on a gorilla. If your software is better than mine or you 
have special sauce that you can add to the ingredients, then your pattern may 
behave differently than the ones I studied. 

I measured performance of Fibonacci-based patterns differently than I do 
other chart pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at the end 
of the pattern and not an up or down breakout. Therefore, the layout of this 
chapter is different from most other chapters in this book. 


27 


28 AB=CD®, Bearish 


The bearish AB=CD performs in two ways. First, if you know the first 
three turns (ABC), then you can anticipate at what price the last turn (D) will 
appear. This works well, with price reaching D nearly all of the time (95% of 
the time or more). Second, once price reaches D, it’s supposed to turn lower. 
My tests show this doesn’t work well (only 32% to 38% of the time). As I men- 
tioned, this could be a flaw with the model I used. Your software may perform 
differently. 

Let’s run through the rest of the Results Snapshot for the bull market 
(you can compare the results with the bear market). I measured the drop from 
the peak at turn D (the last in the pattern) to the ultimate low. Of the five 
bearish Fibonacci-based patterns I studied, this one performs worst in the bull 
market when price drops just 12.7%. The breakeven failure rate is 26.3%, 
which is high. That means price fails to drop more than 5% over a quarter of 
the time. Volume trends downward, but it’s close to random. 

Let’s take a closer look at this pattern to discover what this mysterious 
point D is and what the pattern looks like. 


Tour 


The bearish AB=CD is a Fibonacci based pattern, meaning Fibonacci ratios 
determine the turning points. 

Figure 2.1 shows an example of a bearish AB=CD pattern. The pattern 
appears as turns ABCD on the chart. In this example, leg AB’s height is similar 
to the height of CD, hence the name of the pattern. In the sdeal case, you'll see 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc (AMD) 


Figure 2.1 A bearish AB=CD pattern correctly predicts a downward move in the 
stock after turn D. 


Identification Guidelines 29 


leg CD equal AB. Often, however, the CD leg may be a Fibonacci extension 
away (meaning point D can be far away from the other three turns). That’s not 
a flaw. Rather, that’s just the way the pattern is constructed. 

The duration (days) of AB should also equal the CD duration in the ideal 
case. Here we see leg AB lasting 6 calendar days and CD lasting 8. That’s quite 
close, isn’t it? Most of the time, like I described for price, point D’s date can be 
far removed from the other points. 

In well-behaved patterns of this type, the slope of the AB line should be 
similar to the CD slope, with a retrace in between. That’s almost what you 
see in Figure 2.1, but it’s seldom that pretty. In fact, you can see some bizarre- 
looking AB=CD patterns even though they qualify as valid Fibonacci patterns. 

Volume trends downward in this example, shown on the chart as E. 

This ABCD is a good performer. Price completes a tidy and compact- 
looking pattern and then price falls, making an extended decline into December. 
That’s how the pattern is supposed to behave. 

Let’s go through the guidelines for identifying these patterns. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 2.1 shows identification guidelines for the chart pattern, and Figure 2.2 
shows a typical example. The pattern appears in the figure as ABCD. 
Appearance. As I mentioned, the shape of the bearish AB=CD can look 
weird when point D is far from the ABC turns. The figure is an example of 
that asymmetry, but not an extreme one. Leg AB is 36 days long, so you might 
expect (or hope) the CD move to also be that long. It’s not. CD is 66 days long 
or almost twice the AB duration. It'll be rare that leg CD matches the length 


Table 2.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A three-leg zigzag pattern with two turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 

BC/BA retrace The ratio of BC/BA is one of .382, .5, .618, .707, .786, or .886. 

DC/BC The extension of leg DC to BC is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 1.13, 
extension 1.27, 1.41, 1.618, 2, 2.24, 2.618, or 3.14. 


Hills and valleys From A to B, there should be no valley lower than A and no peak higher 
than B. From B to C, there should be peak higher than B and no valley 
lower than C. From C to D, there should be no valley lower than C 
and no peak higher than D. 


Volume Trends downward most often. Don’t ignore a pattern because of an unu- 
sual volume trend. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for most 
chart patterns. 


30 AB=CD®, Bearish 


Abbott Laboratories (ABT) 


Figure 2.2 This bearish AB=CD pattern breaks out upward. 


of AB. Just because CD is almost twice as far away as AB doesn’t mean the pat- 
tern is invalid. Rather, the turn is determined by the Fibonacci number used 
to located it. 

Let’s talk about the Fibonacci ratios. 

BC/AB retrace. Retrace BC compared to the height of BA is governed 
by the Fibonacci numbers listed in the table. Let’s give your slide rule a work- 
out and go through the math. The low at point A is 56.81, and the high at B 
is 63.85 for a height of 7.04. The low at C is 60.32. I tuned my software to 
find a turn within .01 (1%) of one of the numbers listed in the table, so we get 
(63.85 — 60.32)/(63.85 — 56.81) or 50.1%. That value is almost exactly the 50% 
retrace (.5). So the ABC turn meets the guidelines. 

DC/BC extension. If you invert the ratio found in the last step, you use 
it to find the price of D. In this example, we found the closest Fibonacci num- 
ber to be .5, so we’d expect point D to be twice as far away. To put it another 
way, let’s pick a point D where the ratio of DC to BC is 2. The high at point D 
is 67.36, so the equation is (67.36 — 60.32)/(63.85 — 60.32) or 1.99 (or about 2). 

We found turn ABC to obey one of the numbers listed in the table, and 
we also found point D using a Fibonacci extension (one of them listed in the 
table), so we found a valid AB=CD pattern. 

In this example, price turns down at D, just like it’s supposed to. However, 
the drop is brief (to E). 

Hills and valleys. I excluded any pattern that had a peak or valley outside 
of the turns as described in the table. 

Volume. Although it may not look like a downward volume trend in 
this example (F), linear regression says it recedes. In fact, you'll see volume 
trending downward in most AB=CD patterns and other chart pattern types, 


Focus on Failures 31 


too. If volume trends upward, that’s fine. Don’t throw away a pattern because 
of an unusual volume trend. 

Duration. I imposed a 6-month limit to the length of most chart pat- 
terns, including the AB=CD. It’s an arbitrary limit. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 2.3 shows an example of a failed bearish AB=CD pattern (labeled as 
turns ABCD). The pattern fails in multiple ways. The first is that price doesn’t 
make it up to the predicted point D. 

‘Turn A has a low price of 134.82, B has a high of 148.28, and C has a low 
of 139.95. That gives a BC/BA retrace of .618, so the turn qualifies as a valid 
AB=CD. It predicts that point D should be at 153.41 using the formula: D = 
(B — C)/Ratio + C. 

As the figure shows, point D falls well short of the target, which I show as 
F. Instead, price rises only to D before dropping to E. Imagine that you wanted 
to trade the anticipated rise to point D by buying the stock soon after turn C. 
You placed a stop a few pennies below C, and you would have been stopped out 
at E, which reached a low of 139.79, slightly below the low at C. 

As I mentioned in the Identification Guidelines, there can’t be a low 
below C on the way to the calculated point D. Point E stops the search for D 
because it’s below the low at C. If you ignore that rule, then you have discov- 
ered the second failure type. 


Aon Corp (AON) 


{| hy lal fy? st | it 147 
H PUL fh Pi ae A 145 
ify | } ' He 139 


Jan 18 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 


Figure 2.3 Price is supposed to turn down at F, but the search for point D ends 
when point E is below C. 


32 AB=CD®, Bearish 


The second way this AB=CD fails is when price continues rising instead 
of turning at D. If we ignore the lower low violation at E and assume price 
climbs to K, where turn D should be (153.41), then look what price does. It 
continues rising, doesn’t it? So price fails to turn at the new target D and 
moves to G, peaking at 158.77, well above the 153.41 target. Shorting the 
stock at F would have tested a trader’s courage against a rising price trend 
when the stock climbed to G. 

Look back at Figure 2.2 where it shows another example of how the pat- 
tern fails to see price decline much after D. Price drops from 67.36 (point D) to 
65.22 (point E), a drop of 2.14 points or 3%. Could you make money shorting 
the stock at D, knowing that if you traded it perfectly, you’d make 3%? 

If you owned the stock (long) and sold at D thinking price would drop, 
you'd be happy that the stock dropped to E, but your joy would turn to sadness 
when the stock continued climbing up to F and beyond. It would say you’d 
made a mistake. 

Of course I chose Figure 2.3 to highlight the failure of this pattern to 
perform as expected. That’s what the Focus on Failures section is supposed 
to do. In the next section, we’ll see what the numbers say about how this pat- 
tern behaves. 


Statistics 


Table 2.2 shows general statistics for the bearish AB=CD and tailored to the 
Fibonacci pattern. That means you won’t find explanations for the table entries 
in the Glossary. Most are self-explanatory. 

Number found. If you can program your computer to find them, you'll 
discover that they come out like worms after a heavy downpour. They were so 
plentiful that I limited the number catalogued per stock. 

I found the first pattern in February 1990 and the most recent in Febru- 
ary 2020, finding them in 884 stocks. Not all stocks covered the entire period, 
and some stocks no longer trade. 


Table 2.2 
General Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 2,649 696 
Breakeven failure rate 26.3% 10.2% 
Average decline after D -12.7% -21.6% 


Volume trend 
Performance Up/Down volume 


54% Downward 
-13%U, -13%D 


58% Downward 
-19%U, -24%D 


Trading Tactics 33 


Breakeven failure rate. For those patterns that see price make it up to 
D and reverse there, this is a measure of how often price fails to drop more 5% 
(below the high at D). The bull market value is high (ranking fourth out of five, 
where one has the lowest failure rate), but the bear market rate, at 10.2%, is the 
worst of the five bearish Fibonacci patterns I looked at. 

Average decline after D. This is a measure of the drop after point D, 
for those patterns seeing price make it up to point D and reverse there. As one 
would expect, the drop in bear markets is larger than in bull markets. If you 
were to trade the bearish AB=CD pattern perfectly and frequently, this is how 
much you could make on average. Commissions were not included. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression from the start to end of the pat- 
tern and found it trends downward most of the time, but it’s near random. 

Performance Up/Down volume. I checked performance when volume 
was trending up or down. This applies only to those patterns that turned down 
at D. The bull market shows no performance difference, but in bear markets, 
the performance difference is wider and substantial. Patterns with downward- 
sloping volume see price drop an average of 24% compared to a 19% decline 
for those with up-sloping volume. 


Trading Tactics 


The AB=CD pattern can be a wonderful tool to help predict when price 
will turn and then make a substantial decline. Once you know the first three 
turns, you can determine when and at what price the fourth turn will appear. 
And when turn D appears, the stock will drop. Does it really work like that? 
Let’s find out. 

Table 2.3 shows how price behaves after point D. 

How often does price reach or exceed D? I checked how often price 
climbed far enough to reach the calculated price of D. The table shows that 
nearly all of the patterns reached the target turn. 


Table 2.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price reach or exceed D? 95% 98% 
How often does price turn at D? 32% 38% 
How often does D appear within a week of 43% 45% 
calculated time? 
How many drop to point A? 24% 36% 
How many drop to point B? 76% 87% 


How many drop to point C? 35% 46% 


34 AB=CD®, Bearish 


That’s terrific! Swing traders can use this to predict how far price will rise. 
They can even trade it by buying at the low at C and riding price higher, to D. 

How often does price turn at D? I checked each pattern to see if a 
minor high formed at the calculated point D. I found that only about a third of 
the time will you see price turn lower at the calculated price of D. Because we 
know price rises to D nearly all of the time, we can assume that price continues 
beyond D instead of turning lower when it should. 

This finding is not a deal breaker. Now that we know price will likely 
continue rising, we can just stay in our trade (when we bought after turn C) 
and ride the stock upward until it does turn. 

How often does D appear within a week of calculated time? The 
pattern can work as a predictor of when point D will occur (as well as the price 
of the turn). I found the dates of the ABC turns and found the ratio of CB to 
BA. Then point D followed the equation: D = (C — B)/Ratio + C using dates 
instead of price. 

I found that between 43% and 45% of the time point D appeared within 
(plus or minus a 2-week window) a week of when it was supposed to. Because 
the numbers fall well short of the expected time, I don’t think this measure 
is helpful. 

How many drop to. . .? If price reaches D and turns down, we know 
that the average decline measures between 12% and 22% from Table 2.2. Let’s 
measure how far price drops in terms of turns A, B, and C. 

Point B is closest to turn D, so we would expect the stock to drop that far 
most often. Indeed, the table shows that price reaches turn B between 76% and 
87% of the time. Price will drop to C less often (35% to 46% of the time) and 
reach the bottom of the pattern (point A) even less often. 

Using these values, we can get a sense of how far price might decline. It 
could be less or more, depending on the situation, of course. But at least we 
have a roadmap. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 2.4 shows a sample trade using the AB=CD pattern. 

Jacob poked me in the ribs, then pointed to the screen to discuss his trade. 
“See that? It’s a double bottom.” 

His fingers traced the twin bottoms at EA with a nice peak (F) between 
them. “I can make money trading that.” 

He placed a buy stop a penny above F. That order triggered at G, putting 
him into the stock near the breakout price. Immediately, he placed a stop a 
penny below the lower of the two bottoms, which in this case, was A, at 37.12. 
If the trade went bad, he’d lose about 10%. 

“That’s bigger than the 8% I like to see, but you have to be flexible,” 
he told me. 


Sample Trade 35 


American Express Co (AXP) 
| 49 
48 


; it 47 
\ A: 
{ | r ] ! ; 44 


4 aff 43 
i) Mh 


LWW yy 
yw WE: 


Figure 2.4 Jacob used the bearish AB=CD pattern to exit a trade. 


For about a week, the stock cooperated and climbed to B before starting 
to retrace. 

“The throwback and drop to C made me nervous. I started sweating bul- 
lets because I thought I’d be stopped out. Don’t believe me? The sweat started 
pouring off me, and the furniture started floating. ’m not kidding. You can see 
the watermark.” He pointed to a smudge on the wall. His wide grin made the 
Grand Canyon look like a small ditch by comparison. 

“T thought of selling, but I invariably sell a week or two before the stock 
bottoms. It’s annoying. What helped me this time was when I noticed the bear- 
ish AB=CD pattern.” 

His software helped by providing the location for him. Let’s run through 
the numbers. The low at point A was 37.13, the high at B was 43.14, and the 
low of price bar C was 38.42. Crunching the numbers said that the ratio of 
BC to BA was (43.14 — 38.42)/(43.14 — 37.13) or 78.5%. That was close to the 
78.6% Fibonacci number, so the turn matched the identification guidelines 
(Table 2.1). 

If the pattern worked as he hoped, the CD leg would equal or exceed the 
AB leg and make for a tasty profit. 

The height of the AB move was 43.14 — 37.13 or 6.01. Added to the low 
at C (38.42) gave a target for turn D of 44.43. 

“T doubled my position right there,” he said and poked the screen, leaving 
a fingerprint behind. The second buy was near C, and he set a target to sell both 
positions at 44.43. “I raised my stop, too, to a penny below C. Just in case. . .” 

The stock took off in a straight-line run up to D. The stock sold at the 
exact high at D, 44.43, cashing him out of the AB=CD trade and also out of the 
double bottom trade. 

“Let’s do lunch,” he said. “Pll let you buy.” 


3 


AB=CD®, Bullish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A zigzag pattern that has four turns, two of which are governed by Fibo- 
nacci ratios. 


Upward Moves 
Bull Market Bear Market 

Performance rank 4 out of 5 3 out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 11.6% 3.7% 
Average rise 38.4% 30.5% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
Point D reversal rate 38% 33% 

99% 


How many reach point D? 100% 
See also Bullish bat, bullish butterfly, bullish crab, bullish 


Gartley, measured move down 


The bullish AB=CD pattern is a type of measured move down except 
that the pattern’s turns are determined by Fibonacci ratios. I measured per- 
formance of Fibonacci-based patterns differently than I do other chart pattern 
types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at the end of the pattern and 
not an up or down breakout. Therefore, the layout of this chapter is different 
from most other chapters in this book. 

The theory behind this pattern is that if you know the first three turns 
(ABC), you can calculate the fourth turn (D). The method works nearly all 
of the time, meaning price does fall to the calculated point D. However, when 


36 


Tour 37 


price reaches D, it fails to reverse there. Only about a third (33% in bear mar- 
kets and 38% in bull markets) will see price turn upward when it’s supposed to. 

Of course, your software for identifying the bullish AB=CD may be dif- 
ferent than the model I built, so your performance may vary. Add trading rules 
to improve performance and you may find this pattern a useful tool. Let’s see 
what this pattern looks like. 


Tour 


Figure 3.1 shows an example of a bullish AB=CD. Price begins the pattern at 
peak A after an exhaustion gap warns of the coming retrace. The pattern com- 
pletes at valley D, with turn BC nestled comfortably between those two points. 
Notice that price turned at D and climbed from there (at least for a time). 
Price reversing at D and climbing is how the pattern is supposed to work. 

In this example, price broke out of the pattern upward at F when it closed 
above the top of the pattern. Not shown, but the stock continued higher to rise 
119% above the low at D. If only all chart patterns worked like that! 

This chart is also a good example of the CD leg meeting the projection 
of AB. In other words, the height of AB subtracted from C gives turn D. Thus, 
if you know turns ABC, you can estimate where D will appear. However, you 
can also use that price information to predict where D will be using Fibonacci 
numbers (because turn D can be far away from the ABC turns). I’ll discuss that 
in the next section. 

Notice volume (E) trends downward in this example. A downward volume 
trend happens 47% of the time in a bull market (meaning an upward trend is 
slightly more likely). An upward volume trend helps boost performance, and 
we’ll see how much in the Statistics section. 


Zebra Technologies Corp (ZBRA) 


16 Dec Jan17 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 3.1 This chart shows how a bullish AB=CD pattern sees price turn at D. 


38 AB=CD®, Bullish 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 3.1 shows the identification guidelines, and Figure 3.2 shows an exam- 
ple of a bullish AB=CD pattern. 

Appearance. Bullish AB=CD patterns are a member of what I call Fibo- 
nacci patterns whose turns are set by Fibonacci ratios. I don’t suggest you try 
finding this pattern manually. Rather, use pattern recognition software that can 
hunt down these patterns like a cat hunts mice. I found so many in my quest 
to count them that [ ran out of fingers and toes and had to limit the number a 
stock could report. 


Table 3.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A zigzag pattern that has four turns, two of which are governed by 
Fibonacci ratios. 

CB/AB retrace The retrace should be one of the Fibonacci numbers: .382, .5, .618, 
.707, .786, or .886. 

CD/CB The extension should be one of the Fibonacci numbers: 1.13, 1.27, 

extension 1.41, 1.618, 2, 2.24, 2.618, or 3.14. 

Hills and valleys From A to B, there should be no peak higher than A and no valley lower 
than B. From B to C, there should be no peak higher than C and no 
valley lower than B. From C to D, there should be no valley lower than 
D and no peak higher than C. 

Volume The volume trend provides a slight performance improvement 
depending on the bull or bear market condition. See Table 3.2. 


Duration Limited to 6 months, but that’s an arbitrary value. 


Goldman Sachs Group, The (GS) 


| f \ " ——e < A | r 24 
\ fie I Ania ag 


I / 222 
J i 218 

i? " 
pat B 214 


i} P 210 


16 Dec Jan 17 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 3.2 Another example of a bullish AB=CD pattern with an upward break- 
out (when price closes above the top of the pattern). 


Focus on Failures 39 


CB/AB retrace. The BC retrace of AB should be one of the Fibonacci 
numbers listed in Table 3.1. Let’s use the pattern shown in Figure 3.2 as an exam- 
ple of how this works (rather, how I wrote my software to find these patterns). 

The high price at A is 228.89, the low at B is 213.12, and the high at C is 
225.45. The CB/AB ratio is (225.45 — 213.12)/(228.89 — 213.12) or .782, which 
is darn close to the .786 number in the table. It qualifies as a proper turn. My 
software looks for a number within a window .5% of the target numbers listed in 
the table. 

Once you know the ABC turn, you can determine what D should be 
priced at. In this example D = C - (A - B) or 209.68, which is close to the 
actual low at D of 209.62. 

CD/CB extension. Point D can also be found by the formula C —(C - B)/ 
(Fibonacci number) or 225.45 — (225.45 — 213.12)/.786 in this example. The 
result is 209.76. 

Hills and valleys. The table explains the requirements of peaks and 
valleys between the various points in the pattern. 

Volume. Volume trends upward from points A to D most often, but the 
trend is almost random. 

Duration. I limited patterns to 6 months duration or less. This is an 
arbitrary limit. 


Focus on Failures 
Figure 3.3 shows one example of how this pattern fails. The four points in the 


pattern are labeled as ABCD, and they comprise the bullish AB=CD pattern. 
Volume slopes upward in this example, shown by the diagonal line at E. 


Southern Copper (SCCO) 


18 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar 


Figure 3.3 This bullish AB=CD has price falling through the predicted turning at D. 


40 AB=CD®, Bullish 


Point D is where the stock is supposed to bottom and turn upward, but it 
doesn’t. It’s obvious that the height of CF is much taller than AB, but the height 
can vary depending on the Fibonacci numbers used in construction of the pat- 
tern. The turn at D should be at 40.05, and yet the stock continues lower. 

This type of failure happens often, 62% of the time in bull markets and 
67% of the time in bear markets. Let me also say that this high failure rate 
may be due to the model I used. Your software may find patterns that perform 
better than the ones I found. 

Another way the pattern fails is if the stock doesn’t make it down to D. It 
turns before the predicted target, leaving you waiting to buy the stock with a 
fist full of money. Fortunately, this type of failure is exceedingly rare. 

Finally, the pattern can also fail if it does make it down to D and it does turn 
at D, but the rise isn’t high enough to make money. These types of failures are 
what I call 5% failures and describe them in Table 3.2 as the breakeven failure 
rate. Let’s check the statistics to see what we can learn about this pattern. 


Statistics 


Table 3.2 shows the first batch of statistics for the bullish AB=CD. 

Number found. I found over 2,300 patterns, sorted by market condition, 
in 1,069 stocks from July 1991 to February 2020. I told my program to limit 
the number found so it didn’t overload my spreadsheet. Not all stocks covered 
the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Breakeven failure rate. The failure rate (a measure of how many patterns 
failed to see price climb more than 5%) is quite good, averaging between 3% 
and 12% of those patterns that reached D and reversed there. To put it another 
way, if you were to trade a lot of these patterns perfectly, you’d have an 88% 
chance of seeing price rise more than 5% above the low at D. That’s terrific. 

Average rise after D. I measured the average rise from the low at D for 
those patterns reaching D and turning upward. The average rise is disappoint- 
ing. Non-Fibonacci-based patterns in bull markets perform better, averaging 


Table 3.2 
General Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,741 565 
Breakeven failure rate 11.6% 3.7% 
Average rise after D 38.4% 30.5% 


Volume trend 


Performance Up/Down volume 


53% Upward 
40%U, 37%D 


57% Upward 
33%U, 27%D 


Trading Tactics 41 


42.4%. However, bear markets beat non-Fib patterns with the rise averaging 
30.5% compared to 28.1%, respectively. 

Volume trend, performance. Volume trends upward slightly more often 
than downward, as the table shows. You can improve performance by looking 
at the volume trend. I used linear regression to determine if volume was trend- 
ing upward or downward from the start to end of the pattern (A to D). Often 
you can just look at volume to see the trend. 

Both markets see an improvement in performance if volume trends 
higher. To put it another way, a downward volume trend hurts performance. 


Trading Tactics 


Imagine if you found a pattern that could predict when the stock is going to 
turn. That’s what I had hoped for this pattern. Once you know that the stock 
had bottomed, you could buy and ride it higher. 

Does the stock really turn when it’s supposed to and how high does the 
stock rise? Let’s find out. Table 3.3 shows statistics regarding the behavior of 
price after the pattern ends. 

How often does price reach or exceed D? If you use the pattern to 
predict turn D, then price will hit the target nearly all of the time. The 100% 
hit rate in bull markets is a round-off thing. I found three patterns out of 1,741 
where the stock failed to drop down to the calculated D. So it does fail to reach 
D, but it’s very rare. That’s the good news (it reaches D). 

How often does price turn at D? Here’s where the pattern stumbles. 
For those stocks dropping to D, only about a third will turn when they are 
supposed to. Figure 3.3 shows an example of this when price ignores D and 
continues lower to bottom at F. 

How often does D appear within a week of calculated time? Using 
the first three turns to predict the time when turn D will appear works about 
half the time. It could be better, but sometimes having a clue when something 
will happen can improve your trading. Use this idea just like I explain with 
price in the Identification Guidelines. That is, find the ratio between the time 


Table 3.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price reach or exceed D? 100% 99% 
How often does price turn at D? 38% 33% 
How often does D appear within a week of calculated time? 50% 47% 
How many rise to point A? 40% 22% 
How many rise to point B? 83% 80% 


How many rise to point C? 47% 33% 


42 AB=CD®, Bullish 


to move from B to C compared to the time to move from A to B. Point D 
should appear following the formula, (C — B)/Ratio + C, where ratio is the 
number you just found. 

I'll discuss an example of this in the Sample Trade. 

How many rise to. . .? For those patterns seeing price drop to D and 
turn upward, how far does price rise? The answer to that question is vital for 
swing traders. 

[used the pattern’s turns to gauge success. Point B is closest to turn D, and 
we see price climb that far 83% of the time in bull markets. That’s very good. 

Use A, which is at the top of the pattern, and we see that price makes it up 
that far less than half the time (40%). 

Hopefully you can use the information in these tables to help improve 
trading results using Fibonacci-based patterns. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 3.4 shows a trade George made. His computer program found the 
AB=CD pattern on the way down to D. Let’s go through his buy decision. 

The pattern appears at turns ABCD on the chart. The high at point A is 
6.65, the low at B is 5.81, for a height of 84 cents. Subtracting the height from 
the high at C (6.55) gives a calculated turn D of 5.71. The high-low range at 
D is 5.94-5.59. It’s the first point where the stock drops below the target, and 
it accurately marks the turn. So that becomes point D. 

Let’s see if we can predict when the stock will reach D. Point A is 9 
November 2009, B is at 8 December, and C turns at 16 December. The ratio 
of CB/BA is 8/29 or .28. That’s the ratio between the two legs. 


Hanesbrand Inc. (HBI) 


hott | 
be a UA ” \ v 
Pa ria | Fil h 1 
| ii 


3 
09 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 10 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 3.4 George took a loss buying this AB=CD. 


Sample Trade 43 


For point D, we use the formula D = (C — B)/Ratio + C or (8)/.28 + (16 
December 2009). Turn D is predicted to appear on 14 January 2010. In this 
example, turn D appeared on 20 January, and that’s within a week of the pre- 
dicted time. I consider that a good prediction. 

Volume sloped downward as line G shows. Even though volume slopes 
upward most of the time in an AB=CD pattern, the direction is nearly random 
(53%). He made this trade in a bull market (the bear market ended in early 
2009), and ‘Table 3.2 says a falling volume trend penalizes performance, but 
only by about a percentage point (dropping from 38.4% to 37%). 

He used the traditional measure rule for chart patterns to estimate how 
far price would climb if the pattern broke out upward. The height of the pat- 
tern is A— D (6.65 — 5.59) or 1.06, so the target would be 1.06 + 6.65 or 7.71, 
which is the height added to the high at point A. A downward breakout would 
be D — 1.06 or 4.53 (or 19% lower). 

“When the stock made a strong push upward at E,” he told me, “I bought 
at the open the next day and received a fill at 6.02. And I just ate breakfast, too.” 
He grinned. 

I scratched my head. 

“The stock filled. . ate breakfast. Get it?” 

I exhaled, rolled my eyes, but said nothing. With a calculated rise to 7.71, 
he was looking at a potential gain of 18%. “That sounds reasonable,” he said. 

For grins, he calculated a new target based on half the height (1.06/2 or 
.53 added to the high at A) or 7.18. Ifhe sold at the closer target, he’d make 9%. 

“Let’s look at the historical chart.” He punched keys on his computer 
and pulled up a chart from 2007. “Overhead resistance here,” he pointed and 
swept his finger across the screen. Price moved horizontally for a year. “Looks 
like a cloudbank pattern,” before the bear market started and sucked the stock 
down. If the stock worked as he hoped, it would have to traverse through that 
resistance to reach the full height target. “Am I asking too much for price to 
rise that far?” 

A check of Table 3.3 didn’t set well with him. With just 38% of patterns 
showing a reversal at D, he decided to place a tight stop a penny below the low 
at D (5.59 —.01 or 5.58). 

“The trade went bad right from the start. The day I bought, the stock 
closed lower, almost reversing the move up at price bar E. Four days later,” he 
pointed to F “the stock hit my stop and cashed me out at 5.58 for a loss of 7%. 
That’s one day before it bottomed.” 

The day after he was stopped out, the stock began a rebound that carried 
the stock up to the full-height target, 7.71, shown on the chart as point H. 

Looking back at the trade, the AB=CD pattern found point D accurately 
and on time (within a week of the prediction), but the stock broke out down- 
ward (at F), not upward. It busted the downward breakout when it closed above 
the top of the pattern (above A) and continued higher to reach the full-height 
target (H). 


A 


Bat®, Bearish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Looks like a big W with turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 


Downward Moves 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance rank 1 (best) out of 5 4 out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 17.7% 4.5% 
Average drop -14.3% -20.2% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Point D reversal rate 86% 86% 
See also Big W, bearish crab, bearish butterfly, double bottoms 


(all types), and bearish Gartley 


Every time I see a bearish bat pattern, my first thought is it’s a Big W 
chart pattern. It’s as if the Big W was computerized and the developer used 
Fibonacci ratios to determine the turning points. The bat pattern joins other 
Fibonacci-based patterns: AB=CD, butterfly, crab, and Gartley. 

I measured performance of Fibonacci-based patterns differently than I do 
other chart pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at the end 
of the pattern and not an upward or downward breakout. Therefore, the layout 
of this chapter is different from most other chapters in this book. 

The above Results Snapshot gauges the downward move after the pattern 
ends. The stocks I looked at saw price turn lower 86% of the time after reach- 
ing point D. That percentage is not good but great! 


44 


Tour 45 


The average decline in bull markets is a hair over 14%. The breakeven 
failure rate isn’t too bad, at 17.7%. That means an average of almost 18% of 
the bearish bats will fail to see price drop more than 5% below the high at D 
(end of the pattern). 

All of this may be confusing unless you can see what a typical bat pattern 
looks like. So let’s take a quick tour. 


Tour 


Figure 4.1 shows an example of a bearish bat. The pattern begins at X, which 
is any significant turn. The locations of points A and B follow, but their place- 
ment is determined by one of two Fibonacci numbers. Once points XAB are 
found, the search for C can begin using one of six Fibonacci numbers. Follow- 
ing that, if you’re lucky, D will appear close to one of four Fibonacci numbers. 
One last number, .886, helps validate the pattern. All of that gibberish means 
this pattern is complicated, and that makes it rare. 

If you’re handy with a slide rule (remember those?), then you'll be wast- 
ing your time searching for a bat. Even using a fancy electronic calculator 
will take too much time to find a bat. Use a computer with pattern-finding 
software. I have a free one on my website called Patternz which will find this 
pattern and dozens of others. Try using it if you’re serious about finding bats. 

Even for a bearish bat, this example looks weird because of the uneven 
bottoms (A and C). Volume trends upward (E) when Table 4.2 says the average 
pattern shows a downward trend. As bad as this bat looks, it performs exceed- 
ingly well, with price dropping to F. This bearish bat is indeed bearish. 


Ralph Lauren Corp. (RL) 


18 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 4.1 The five turns, X, A, B, C, and D, complete the bearish bat. 


46 Bat®, Bearish 


A swing trader taking a position just after D forms and watching the 
stock go all the way down to F might start dreaming about bats. Maybe even 
build some bat houses and hang them on his (or her) property. Here’s a hint: a 
nearby pond is a plus. Let’s return to trading bats. First, we have to find them. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 4.1 shows identification guidelines. The guidelines are similar to other 
Fibonacci-based patterns except the turns may use different numbers. 
Figure 4.2 shows another example of a bearish bat. 


Table 4.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic | Discussion 


Appearance Looks like a big W with turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 
BA/XA retrace The ratio of BA/XA is either .382 or .5 
BC/BA retrace The ratio of BC/BA is one of .382, .5, .618, .707, .786, or .886 


DC/BC extension The extension of leg DC to BC is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 1.618, 
2, 2.24, or 2.618. 


DA/XA retrace The ratio of DA to XA is .886. 


Volume Volume is downward the majority of the time, but this is an observation, 
not a requirement. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for most 
chart patterns. 


Cree Inc (CREE) 


10 Jul Aug Sep Dec Jan 11 Feb 


Figure 4.2 This bearish bat sees price dip after D but still breaks out upward. 


Identification Guidelines 47 


Appearance. My guess is that the name comes from the picture which 
forms when you connect turns XABCD with lines, but also includes lines con- 
necting XB and BD. The pattern looks like two wings. When trying to visual- 
ize this, consumption of alcohol may be a plus. 

As I mentioned, the pattern’s turns are found using Fibonacci numbers. 
Let’s go through this pattern to see how the bat in Figure 4.2 qualifies. 

BA/XA retrace. The ratio of leg BA to XA should be either .382 or .5. 
Here are the prices used in the retrace or extension calculations for the bearish 
bat. The high price of point X is 56.93. The low at point A is 47.81, B peaks at 
52.00, C bottoms at 49.71, and the pattern ends at D with a high price of 55.98. 

To determine the retrace, I use the height (high-low range) of the price 
bar at the target to determine whether or not it spans a Fibonacci number. For 
example, the BA/XA turn using the high price of B would be (52.00 — 47.81)/ 
(56.93 — 47.81) or .46. Using the low price at B (50.90) in the equation gives 
(50.90 — 47.81)/(56.93 — 47.81) or .34. The range .34 to .46 straddles the .382 
Fibonacci number, so I allow it as a valid XAB turn. 

Using this method gives a lot of leeway to the pattern’s turns but even so, 
the pattern is rare. Trying to narrow the turn window would limit even more 
patterns from being found, so this is the algorithm I chose. The software you 
use may think differently. 

BC/BA retrace. In a manner similar to the BA/XA retrace, I plugged in 
the numbers for the BC/BA retrace (using the low at C). They are (52 — 49.71)/ 
(52 —47.81) or .55. Using the high at C (51.65) gives (52 — 51.65)/(52 —47.81) or 
.08. The range of .08 to .55 encompasses .382 and .5, so I allow the turn as valid. 

DC/BC extension. In a similar manner, I find the DC extension of BC. 
That’s (55.98 — 49.71)/(52 — 49.71) or 2.74. Using the low at D (54), we get 
an extension of 1.87. The 1.87 to 2.74 values straddle all of the listed numbers 
(any one of which will suffice) except 1.618, so it qualifies as a valid extension. 

DA/XA retrace. Supposedly, this ratio is critical, so I allow point D to 
miss the number by 3% (.03). I do mot use the high-low range of D in the equa- 
tion and I use 3% instead of 1% because this pattern is rare enough as it is. We 
have (55.98 — 47.81)/(56.93 — 56.93) or .9. The .9 value is near the .886 target, 
so the pattern qualifies as a valid bearish bat. 

As you can imagine, computing these ratios by hand is tedious and error 
prone, so I programmed my computer to find bats by first finding all peaks and 
valleys and then using the method described to glue them together. 

Volume. I'll discuss a few volume statistics in Table 4.2, but volume 
trends downward in the pattern most of the time. With few samples, it’s dif- 
ficult to say whether up or down trending volume leads to better or worse 
performance, but current statistics favor a downward volume trend for the best 
performance. 

Duration. I limited patterns to a length of 6 months or less. That’s an 
arbitrary limitation. 


48 Bat®, Bearish 


Table 4.2 


General Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 537 128 
Breakeven failure rate 17.7% 4.5% 
Average decline after D -14.3% -20.2% 


Volume trend 


Performance Up/Down volume 


74% Downward 
-14%U, -15%D 


67% Downward 
—~20%U, —20%D 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 4.3 shows a failure of a bearish bat pattern. Why is it a failure? As the 
name implies (bearish bat, not bullish), price should drop after point D (mean- 
ing price should trend lower after the pattern ends). However, price continues 
trending higher in this example. Price closes above the top of the pattern (X) 
at point E, posting an upward breakout. 

I checked the statistics and found that 70% of the 665 bats I looked at 
break out upward, regardless of the market condition (bull or bear). Don’t let 
that number give you nightmares. As awful as the 70% number is, it doesn’t 
tell the complete story. Swing traders will soon learn (as discussed in Table 4.2) 
that price turns lower at point D 86% of the time. Price may still break out 
upward, as Figure 4.3 shows, but maybe you can make money when price drops 
between D and the breakout. 


Paychex Inc (PAYX) 


lull 

| ry 
iyi Ah : 
| > ft a3 

L is 

iif hi ili 62 
I ' ly | : 61 
I 1 60 
A c 59 
18 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 4.3 This bearish bat isn’t bearish at all. 


Statistics 49 


I don’t show this situation in Figure 4.3, but if price does turn lower at 
D but drops less than or equal to 5%, then that’s also a failure. If you were to 
trade a pattern with a 5% failure, you’d be hard pressed to make money. The 
5% failure rate (also called the breakeven failure rate) is 17.7% for this pattern 
in bull markets (but just 4.5% in bear markets). 

Since I’m throwing around a lot of numbers, let’s discuss statistics. 


Statistics 


Table 4.2 shows general statistics related to the bearish bat pattern. 

Number found. Despite using the high-low price range at most of the 
Fibonacci turns, as I discussed in the Identification Guidelines, few bats appear 
in the historical price record. I found them in 491 stocks despite searching 
from June 1991 to August 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period and 
some no longer trade. 

Breakeven failure rate. I counted the number of patterns which saw 
price drop no more than 5% after peaking at D (using the high price at D to 
the ultimate low). The table shows the failure rate. Anything above zero is too 
high, but that’s in an ideal world. The bear market failure rate, at 4.5%, is ter- 
rific. The 17.7% failure rate in bull markets is not so terrific. 

When you consider that a declining price trend in bw// markets is like 
swimming against the current, you would expect a high failure rate. Swim 
with the bear market current and the failure rate drops to one-fourth the bull 
market rate. 

Average decline after D. Point D ends the pattern and price is supposed 
to head lower. The average decline is 14.3% in bull markets but substantially 
better in bear markets, over 20%. 

Volume trend, performance. I measured the volume trend using linear 
regression but often you can tell the trend just by looking at the chart. Fig- 
ure 4.2, for example, shows volume (EF) higher on the left half of the pattern 
than the right half, so the trend is downward. In fact, the average bearish bat 
will have a downward volume trend at least most of the time. 

Does the volume trend give us any hint of better or worse performance? 
Not that you’d notice. The widest spread between the two numbers is one 
percentage point in bull markets. That’s probably not statistically significant. 


Trading Tactics 


The real purpose of the bearish bat is for swing traders to predict the turn at D 
and then go short, anticipating a drop to the bottom of the pattern. Will price 
sink that far? Maybe, maybe not. Let’s look at some number to see if we can 
model behavior better. 


50 Bat®, Bearish 


Table 4.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price turn at D? 86% 86% 
How many drop to point A? 35% 38% 
How many drop to point B? 81% 80% 
How many drop to point C? 48% 46% 


Table 4.3 uses numbers to show how price behaves after the pattern 
completes at D. 

How often does price turn at D? At the end of the pattern, price can 
form a minor high at D or price can continue trending upward (as in a straight- 
line run up). Most of the time (86%), the stock will form a minor high at D. 
To find the reversal rate, I checked for a minor high appearing there (that is, 
I checked to see if price actually turned lower). Figure 4.3 shows an example 
where the stock failed to turn significantly lower at D. 

How many drop to. . .? This measures the drop after D but uses the 
pattern’s turns as targets. For example, I found that in bull markets, the stock 
reached turn B 81% of the time. Turn B is the closest turn below D, so it 
should, and does, have the highest hit rate in the table. 

At the bottom of the pattern is point A. Price reaches A just over a third 
of the time. 

You can use these findings to help calculate where your stock might turn. 
Because you’re dealing with probabilities, anything can happen. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 4.4 shows how Pete used a bearish bat. He bought the stock when 
it broke out to a new high, at E (the highest price bar on the chart). “Don’t 
laugh,” he told me. “How many of these zingers have you got caught in?” 

I didn’t say a word, but blushed instead. Many years ago I bought a stock 
and watched it more than double. Wonderful! But I felt it had more to give so 
I held on. It lost all of its gains, dropped in half, and I sold near the low. Oops. 
Then it recovered. Of course it recovered with me watching from the sidelines. 

So I know how Pete feels. Maybe you do, too. As traders, we all make mis- 
takes. And that’s the beauty of experience. It allows you to recognize a mistake 
when you make it again. 

Pete believed in the company and had profited over the years by holding 
onto the stock. He checked in every few weeks and saw price continuing to 
move lower. The decline didn’t bother Pete. Why? 

“Because it’s a chance to buy the stock at a lower price. Like it’s on sale.” 


Sample Trade 51 


Apple Inc. (AAPL) 
230 


A A, 226 

vf Toe Tiny | 2 

ow | 1 \ Joy wt 214 

ria i 4 re F jie 
ws 


é ht \ at” ! 206 
i he if hai f ; 


202 

\ \/ ihe y 198 
i, A, ry 

Pt 1 HM, | 194 

a iJ { 190 


, P 
Ay) 186 


} 1,1 4 182 
ne " 


ai 174 
, \ cf 170 
166 

# D 162 
/ B iy 158 
Ny 154 

| 150 
146 


Al 142 
18 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 4.4 Pete bought near the high and made a quick swing trade after D. 


He made a fortune using the buy-the-dip method to trade stocks (that is, 
buy when price makes a significant dip). The problem with that logic is that 
the stock has to recover. “I have faith,” he said and pulled out a cross draped 
on a necklace strung around his neck. He kissed the cross and then tucked it 
back under his shirt. 

Pete’s computer alerted him to the bearish bat pattern which formed as 
labeled on the chart (XABCD). 

With additional shares, he decided to trade the throwback (which didn’t 
occur in this pattern). He set a buy order to grab 1,000 shares a penny above 
X (not D) or 159.37. The stock gapped open higher (breakaway gap) and he 
received a fill at the open at F, at 163.25. 

He used a limit order to sell his 1,000 shares at 5% above X, or 167.34. 

The next day, the order filled. He made just over $4,000 in two days. Of 
course, if he’d held onto the shares and sold at the ultimate high in late Janu- 
ary 2020 at 327.85, he would have double his money. That’s for a perfect trade, 
of course. 

If he’d held during the Covid-19 bear market and sold at the late March 
2020 low, he’d still pocket almost $50,000. 


5 


Bat®, Bullish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Looks like a big M with turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 


Upward Moves 
Bull Market 
Performance rank 1 (best) out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 10.2% 
Average rise 44.3% 
Volume trend Downward 


Point D reversal rate 91% 


See also Big M, double tops, bullish AB=CD, bullish crab, bullish 
butterfly, and bullish Gartley 


The bullish bat is a Big M chart pattern except that Fibonacci ratios 
determine the turning points. I don’t show bear market statistics in this chap- 
ter because I found just 53 patterns. That’s too few to be worth discussing, 
especially when sorted into different categories. 

I found 259 bullish bats in the data I searched. That’s too few to be com- 
fortable drawing conclusions, but let’s live dangerously, shall we? 

I measured performance of Fibonacci-based patterns differently than I do 
other chart pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at the end 
of the pattern and not an up or down breakout. Therefore, the layout of this 
chapter is different from most other chapters in this book. 


52 


Tour 53 


The Results Snapshot (previous page) shows the average rise from the low 
at turn D is 44.3%, which is quite good. That beats the 42.4% average gain for 
non-Fibonacci-based patterns. Failures, at about 10% of patterns, are also quite 
good. They are well below the 15.3% failure rate for non-Fibonacci patterns. 

Swing traders will want to buy long at turn D. Price turns upward at 
D 91% of the time in the bats I looked at. That’s sensational. It’s a headline 
performance. 

The performance rank, which is based on the average rise from point D 
when compared to other Fibonacci patterns, is first out of five. It’s the best 
performing Fibonacci pattern. The performance rank of bear market patterns 
(not shown) is also first (best), out of five contenders. 


Tour 


Figure 5.1 shows what a bullish bat pattern looks like, one that performs better 
than expected. The pattern has five turning points, cleverly labeled X, A, B, C, 
and D. Why is X labeled as the first turning point? I haven’t a clue, I’m too lazy 
to find out, and that’s the convention. So that’s what I use. 

In Figure 5.1, the bat appeared when price formed a second bottom at X, 
mirroring the valley in October. Price recovered to the top of a trading range 
setup by prior peaks (and valleys) and hit turn A, the top of the pattern. Price 
found overhead resistance there that it couldn’t overcome. So price retraced in 
an ABC-type consolidation (that is, a drop to B, upward retrace to C, and drop 
to D). The stock broke out upward at F when price closed above the top of the 
pattern, pushed through a ceiling of resistance, and soared. 


Paypal Holdings, Inc (PYPL) 


fi. . My \ A 
any ti "y i 
i? 

i 


18 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 5.1 This bullish bat breaks out upward (at F) and makes a strong 
push higher. 


54 Bat®, Bullish 


Volume trended upward, which I show at E. This is one of the few bats to 
show an upward volume trend. Based on the average, bats with an upward vol- 
ume trend tend to underperform. I will discuss statistics later in this chapter. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 5.1 shows the identification guidelines for the bullish bat. Use 
Figure 5.2 as a reference. If you don’t have a computer that can find these 
patterns, give up now. Go search for a Big M or double top instead. They are 
easier to find because you don’t have to do any calculation. Plus, bats are as rare 
as Klingons on Vulcan (or so I assume. I haven’t visited there recently). 

Figure 5.2 shows a bullish bat at turns XABCD. This one sees price climb 
after D, but breaks out downward, at E. 

Appearance. If you draw lines connecting turns XAB (and back to X), 
and connect BCD (and back to B), you’ll notice that the two halves form a set 
of wings. Imagine a body at B and it'll resemble a bat (or butterfly or birds or 
lots of other flying creatures, I think). But this pattern is called a bullish bat, so 
that’s the story I’m sticking with. 

Without the lines, the pattern looks like a big M chart pattern or even 
a double top with tall sides. The difference between the bullish bat and those 
other patterns is the use of Fibonacci ratios to determine the turning points, 
so let’s discuss that next. 

AB/AX retrace. Let me give an example of how to find the various 
points. Points X and A are arbitrary minor low and high points, respectively. 
Minor low B is an important one. The ratio of leg AB to AX should be either 
.382 or .5. Because the pattern is so complicated, the rules determining valid 
ones limit the numbers you will find in the real world. So I used the high-low 


Table 5.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic | Discussion 


Appearance Looks like a big M with turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 
AB/AX retrace The ratio of AB/AX is either .382 or .5 
CB/AB retrace The ratio of CB/AB is one of .382, .5, .618, .707, .786, or .886 


CD/CB extension The extension of leg CD to CB is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 
1.618, 2, 2.24, or 2.618. 


AD/AX retrace _ The ratio of AD to AX is .886. 
Volume Volume is downward the majority of the time, but this is an observation, 
not a requirement. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for 
many chart patterns. 


Identification Guidelines 55 


Apache Corp. (APA) 


Mun, Me a 16 


wns : 


W “ é a 


98 Mar 


Figure 5.2 This bullish bat rises after point D, but breaks out downward at E. 


price range of one of the points in the ratio. If a Fibonacci number is within 
the high-low range, then it’s allowed as a valid turning point. 

For example, the low at point X is 9.76. The high at A is 12.90, and the 
high-low range at B is 11.81 - 11.40. The AB/AX ratio using the high at B 
would be (12.90 — 11.81)/(12.90 — 9.76) or .35. Using the low price at B would 
give (12.90 — 11.40)/(12.90 — 9.76) or .48. The .382 number nestles comfort- 
ably between .35 and .48, so XAB is a valid turn. 

CB/AB retrace. In a similar manner, I use the high at A, low at B, and 
high-low range at C (12.57 to 11.98) to qualify the CB/AB retrace. Plugging 
in the numbers we get a range of .39 to .78. That range must encompass one 
of the numbers listed in the table, and it does. In fact, several of the numbers 
listed fall within that range. Although such a large range might seem like the 
recognition rules are lax, only a few patterns qualify. Let’s continue with the 
CD extension. 

CD/CB extension. CD is longer than CB, so we call that an extension 
and not a retrace. Let’s go through the math for this one. It follows the same 
rules as before. I use the low at B, high at C, and the high-low range at D to 
qualify the three points. D is at 10.81 to 10.19. Plugging them into the equa- 
tion, we get (12.57 — 10.81)/(12.57 — 11.40) or 1.50 using the high at D. The 
low at D becomes: (12.57 — 10.19)/(12.57 — 11.40) or 2.03. Two numbers fit 
that range: 1.618 and 2, so the turn qualifies. 

AD/AX retrace. For the last turn of the bat, I don’t use the high-low 
range. Rather, the number must be within .03 of the target .886 value (using 
the low at D only). So we get (12.90 — 10.19)/(12.90 — 9.76) or .86, which is 
within .03 of the .886 target. This pattern qualifies as a valid bullish bat, but 
your software may use a different algorithm and find a different result. 


56 Bat®, Bullish 


Volume. The bullish bat doesn’t have a volume requirement. Rather, 
you'll see volume recede from point X to D (the width of the pattern) most 
of the time. I'll discuss volume in the Statistics section. Point F in the figure 
shows a downward volume trend. 

Duration. There are no rules limiting the width of the pattern, but I 
limited them to six months. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 5.3 shows a bullish bat that fails to be bullish. I show the five turns at 
XABCD. It’s a valid bullish bat even though it looks weird. Price at D should 
see the stock turn higher, but it doesn’t. It does form a minor low, but that 
doesn’t translate into any meaningful rebound in the stock. 

Instead of turning upward at D, the stock continues lower, breaking out 
downward at E. Price continuing lower at D (instead of turning upward) is the 
first type of failure. 

The second type of failure is when price does turn upward at D, but doesn’t 
climb far. I consider a move no more than 5% to be a failure. Figure 5.3 shows 
this type of failure, too, because price climbs just 3% after D. 

Five percent failures only happen about 10% of the time, so they are a 
concern, but not a huge one. 

Let’s talk about statistics next. 


Era Group Inc (ERA) 


| 

Lal 
AN, 32 
‘i ihe "yin iy" A c a 

hf a 

! Mist i a Wty) Yom os 
: X 27 
av z 


13 Nov. Dec Jan14_ Feb = Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan15 Feb /® 


Figure 5.3 This bullish bat isn’t bullish at all. Price fails to turn higher at D and 
breaks out downward from the pattern. 


Trading Tactics 57 


Table 5.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Number found 259 
Breakeven failure rate 10.2% 
Average rise after D 44.3% 
Volume trend 80% Downward 
Performance Up/Down volume 35%U, 47%D 
Statistics 


Table 5.2 shows a few general statistics for the bullish bat. 

Number found. This complicated pattern is rare, but it could be the 
result of the way I programmed my computer to find them. I unearthed bats 
(in both bull and bear markets) in only 260 stocks despite searching over 1,300 
stocks. Patterns found in the stocks stretched from July 1991 to April 2019. 
There were so few patterns that I limited the presentation to bull markets only, 
as I mentioned. 

Breakeven failure rate. The breakeven failure rate is a measure of how 
often patterns fail to rise more than 5% (as measured from the low at D). With 
such a high average rise (44.3%), you might expect to see a low failure rate. 
Indeed, that’s what the pattern shows, at 10.2%. 

Average rise after D. The average rise measures from the low at point 
D. The 44.3% rate compares favorably to the 42.4% average rise from non- 
Fibonacci-based patterns. 

Volume trend, performance. Volume trends lower 80% of the time as 
measured from the start of the pattern to the end using linear regression. Per- 
formance is best if the trend is downward (with rises averaging 47%!). 

However, don’t let the wide difference (35% and 47%) between the two 
values fool you. I found just 27 samples with upward volume trends, which is 
probably why the 35% gain is so tiny. The difference between the two values 
will shrink with more samples. 


Trading Tactics 


Are you a swinger? Swing trader, that is. If so, then the following table is just 
for you. With this pattern, you can use your software to calculate at what price 
D would need to appear to complete the bat. Then you can wait to see if 
it appears. 

If it does, then consider buying the stock and riding price higher. But 
how often does the stock turn upward at D, and how far up does price rise? 


58 Bat®, Bullish 


Table 5.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market 
How often does price turn at D? 91% 
How many rise to point A? 58% 
How many rise to point B? 86% 
How many rise to point C? 64% 


Those are important questions any swing trader wants to know. Here’s what I 
found out. 

Table 5.3 shows how price behaves after point D. 

How often does price turn at D? I found price turning upward at 
D 91% of the time, which is wonderful. It’s exciting. Swing traders will be 
delighted when I share the news, I’m sure. 

How many rise to. . .P Gauging performance using another method, I 
checked how often price climbed to the various turns in the pattern. 

For example, the closest turn to D is B. I found that price climbed to B 
86% of the time. At the top of the pattern is point A. How many climbed to 
A? Answer: 58%. 

Even though just over half of bats saw price reach A, with an average rise 
of 44%, it’s clear many bats see price rise substantially to overcome the stinkers 
trying to pull the results down. 

Hopefully, you can use these numbers as guidance to help you trade this 
pattern better by estimating how far price might rise. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 5.4 shows a sample trade that Scott made. Scott has been a longtime 
admirer of Apple products, so when his software flagged a bullish bat, he took 
an interest in the stock. I show the bat as turns XABCD. 

“T measured the height of the pattern,” he said and pointed to the chart. 
From the peak at A (60.96) to the low at X (50.61), the height was 10.35. 

His statistics on bullish bats showed there was a 60% probability that the 
stock would climb to 71.31, which is the height added to peak A. (The 60% 
number comes from the traditional way of gauging chart pattern performance 
using the measure rule. Price reaches the target 60% of the time when you add 
the height of the pattern to the top of it.) 

“You might not believe this, but I really didn’t care about the answer. I wanted 
to hold the stock for the long term, but having that background info is reassuring.” 

Scott is also a fan of trendlines. For entry, he drew a trendline skirting the 
peaks going down to turn D. The day after D, the stock closed above the line, 
signaling a buy (with the belief that the bearish bat had found a bottom at D). 


Sample Trade 59 


Apple Inc. (AAPL) 


11 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 12 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 5.4 This is a sample trade using a bullish bat. 


“Here’s where I got creative. I used the bullish AB=CD chart pattern to 
find that turn D was overdue.” It predicted a bottom priced at 53.34, located 
in the area gap at G, so that gave Scott more confidence that the stock had put 
in a bottom at D. Regardless, he bought the stock at the open the next day and 
received a fill at 53.66. 

“T placed a stop below the low at D, and below 52.00. Know why?” Before 
I could answer, he said, “Because at 51.83 it’s seven cents below D and it avoids 
the round number 52.’That’s where others might place their trades.” 

The stock cooperated and moved higher, forming a slightly upward curv- 
ing trend. I show that on the chart (log scale) as a series of three lines ris- 
ing toward E. 

When the stock closed below the trendline near EF, he placed an order to 
sell the stock at the open the next day. He received a fill at 87.14 for a gain of 
33.48 a share, or 62% (not including commissions). 

“T got lucky on this trade,” he told me. 

“Why? ” 

“Two reasons. First, because the stock might not have turned upward at 
D. And second, I forgot to raise my stop.” 

That’s not always a bad thing, especially for long-term holds. If you’re 
swing trading or short-term trading, then consider using a trailing stop, one 
that price stalks as it moves upward. 

Another lucky factor was how the stock behaved with price rising in a 
near straight-line run up to E. Although the stock retraced after E to 74.60, it 
went on to a new high at just over 100 in September 2012. The stock need not 
have dropped far at E before moving higher, too. Still, for a relatively short- 
term trade, the exit was timely and the entry was delicious, too. Isn’t there a red 
delicious brand of apple? Get it? He traded apple stock. . . 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Iwo peaks near the same price form a pattern that resembles an M. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term 
bearish reversal bearish reversal 

Performance rank 8 out of 36 10 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 14% 8% 
Average decline 17% 22% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 67% 63% 
Percentage meeting price target 55% 58% 
See also Bullish bat, double tops 


The big M chart pattern is a variation of a double top, a twin peak pattern 
with a tall left side. In well-behaved patterns, the right side will also be tall so 
that the pattern resembles a tall M. The pattern confirms when price closes 
below the valley between the two peaks. We’ll see a picture of the pattern 
in a moment. 

Big Ms only break out downward, but they appear in both bull and bear 
markets. The average decline is about what you would expect from a bear- 
ish chart pattern, higher in bear markets than in bull markets. Volume trends 


60 


Tour 61 


downward from the first peak to the second, but plays no role in performance. 
Volume devotees may find that odd. 

The performance rank for big Ms is good in bull markets but slips in 
bearish ones as the above statistics show. Let’s look at some examples to see if 
we should include them in our trading toolbox. 


Tour 


Figure 6.1 shows a good example of a big M chart pattern. Price begins climb- 
ing to the first peak in the pattern from the launch price at A. Think of point 
A as the launch pad with the hope that price will return to the pad after the 
pattern completes. 
In perfectly shaped big Ms, the price trend to the first peak is a straight 
line affair, often quite fast and steep, like you see here on the way to peak B. 
The big M is a twin peak pattern, BC. It’s similar in shape to a double top 
except for the tall sides, as [ mentioned. Between the peaks is a recession, D, 
a valley where price bottoms. The stock recovers and forms a second peak, C. 
After the second peak, price drops and breaks out when price closes below 
the valley between the two peaks. That happens at E in this example. The stock 
continues lower but then gets sucked back up to G. It’s a pullback, which often 
returns the stock back to, or near to, the breakout price in 12 days on average. 
A pullback is not part of the big M. Rather it’s just something that occurs 
about two-thirds of the time. Traders need to be aware of it so that they don’t 
close out a position prematurely. 


Clean Energy Fuels Corp. (CLNE) 


\ 
h h \h | f " 
M ti \ |! \h | 13 


D G 15 


10 Oct Nov Dec Jan 11 Feb Mar Apr May — Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 6.1 This big M sees price rise up to peak B and drop from peak C, bottom- 
ing at F just below the launch price, A. 


62 Big M 


In well-behaved big Ms, price drops after the second peak in a straight- 
line run down to the launch price, mirroring the rise to the first peak. That 
behavior represents the ideal situation, so don’t depend on that happening in 
real life. In this example, the stock drops farther than the launch price, bottom- 
ing at F. Many times, however, price will bottom just above the launch price. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 6.1 shows the identification guidelines for the big M. 

Figure 6.2 provides another example of a big M at BD. Price begins the 
rise at A, the launch price (which is the second bottom of a nicely shaped Adam 
& Adam double bottom). Along the way, price gaps (an exhaustion gap because 
price consolidates after the gap) just past midway to the first peak and forms a 
pennant before resuming the climb to B. 

Price meanders up and down as it searches for a bottom at C. The valley 
between BD looks like a mutant head-and-shoulders bottom (the left shoulder 
is LS, the right shoulder is RS, with head C between them. It’s not an ideal 
head-and-shoulders because the two shoulders don’t bottom at the same price). 

At peak D, price gaps lower (breakaway gap) as if it can wait to reach 
grandma’s house at E. The stock bottoms at E, which is just above the launch 
price (A). Notice that in this example, the rise from A to B is similar to the drop 
from D to E. That behavior rarely happens, so consider this a textbook example. 

Appearance. Look for two peaks that top out near the same price. The 
two peaks likely won’t share the exact same price, but they should be close. Use 
your best judgment and be flexible. If the right peak is higher than the left, 
performance improves but only by a percentage point. Oddly, performance is 
best if both peaks share the same price. 


Table 6.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Two peaks near the same price form a pattern that resembles an M. 


The price trend approaching the first peak should move upward 
at a good clip, with few or no pauses along the way. Be flex- 


ible, though. 
Price trend Price rises into the first top, often a multiple of the big M’s height. 
See text for guidance. 
Volume Trends downward from peak to peak. 
Breakout direction, Downward. A breakout occurs when price closes below the valley 
confirmation between the two peaks. It confirms the pattern as a valid big M. 
Duration No minimum is set, but the median time between the two peaks is 


about a month. 


Identification Guidelines 63 


Robert Half International (RHI) 


18 Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 6.2 This big M (BD) struggles to find a bottom between the two peaks 
(where a head-and-shoulders bottom appears). 


Between the two peaks, price forms a valley. I didn’t set a limit on how far 
down the valley price slides, but the median height is about 12% in bull markets. 

After the second peak, price drops, but often won’t fall as steeply as it 
climbed on the rise to the first peak. In perfect patterns, the slope of the rise 
to the first peak will mirror the drop after the second peak, as I mentioned. In 
real life, it takes twice as long to drop from the second peak to the ultimate low 
as it did to climb from the launch price to the first peak. 

Price trend. The price trend leading to the first peak should be unusu- 
ally tall, often a straight-line run up at a steep slope. As a good gauge, I looked 
at the height from the higher of the two peaks (D) to the valley between the 
two peaks (C). The upward trend leading to the first peak (A to B) should be 
a multiple of the peak to valley height (at least one times the height, but two 
times is better, CD). 

Volume. Volume trends downward from the first to the second peak 
most often. Don’t discard a big M pattern because it has a rising volume trend. 
Volume doesn’t affect performance. We'll see that later in Table 6.6. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. The pattern breaks out downward. A 
breakout happens when price closes below the low price of the valley between 
the two peaks. I show the breakout where price closes below line G. 

A downward breakout confirms the big M as a valid chart pattern. If price 
does not break out downward, then you don’t have a big M. 

Duration. The length of the pattern, from peak to peak, varies from 
about a week to nearly a year (I often limit pattern width to 6 months, but the 
longest I cataloged was 254 days. I’m sure I can find wider ones), especially if I 
use a weekly scale (I prefer daily). 


64 BigM 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 6.3 shows what a big M failure looks like. Price begins a long climb at 
A toward peak B. The drop to C and recovery to the second peak, D, is typi- 
cal for a big M. Contrast dip C with the sloppy head-and-shoulders valley in 
Figure 6.2. 

So far, the chart pattern looks perfect, a textbook example of a big M. 
Let’s look at the volume trend (G). It slopes upward. Uh-oh. But a rising vol- 
ume trend in a big M doesn’t have any impact on performance, so who cares? 

At E, price breaks out downward when it closes below C, confirming the 
big M pattern as a valid chart pattern. However, the stock bottoms at E. 

What happened? 

A trader shorting the stock would become a body on the way to the 
morgue if they didn’t close out their trade promptly. Price steamrolled higher 
by 131% on its way to being taken over by another company in January 2020. 

Notice the breakout day volume. I drew a line from the breakout (E) to 
the volume bar directly beneath (H). Yes, volume is higher on the breakout 
day, but it is less than the 1-month average (according to my computer, and it’s 
never lied. . .so far). The statistics say that breakout volume for big Ms doesn’t 
help or hurt performance. So that’s another yawn, and it’s not really a perfor- 
mance clue, either. 

Price rises after E and busts the downward breakout when it closes 
above the top of the pattern, at F (a breakaway gap). This is another exam- 
ple where bearish selling pressure wasn’t high enough to overcome bullish 
buying demand. The bulls didn’t buy like crazy and push price higher. That’s 
clear from the anemic volume surrounding the breakout, but the stock moved 


up anyway. 


Avon Products (AVP) 


18 Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 6.3 Price fails to drop more than 5% after the downward breakout. 


Statistics 65 


The failure of this stock to stage a meaningful decline at E happens 14% 
of the time, and this is one example. A busted big M happens 38% of the time, 
so that’s more alarming. 

Let’s talk more about numbers. 


Statistics 


Table 6.2 shows general statistics for the big M. Notice that the tables are 
not split into up and down breakouts. That’s because valid big Ms don’t have 
upward breakouts, at least not in this universe. 

Number found. I uncovered most big M patterns manually by searching 
through more than 1,700 stocks (finding big Ms in 772 stocks) from mid-1991 
to September 2019. I also automated finding them and checked each one to 
be sure they adhered to the ID guidelines. That process helped to unearth the 
stinkers like the one shown in Figure 6.3, where the pattern has a nice left-side 
rise but a mutant right-side decline. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. All of the patterns acted as 
reversals of the uptrend by definition. 

Average decline. Both bull and bear markets show performance that 
beats the average of all other chart patterns, but not by an amount that Mom 
would like to hear about, especially at three in the morning. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Using the same hold time from the 
breakout to the ultimate low as the associated big M, we find that the big M 
dropped substantially more than the S&P 500 index. To put it another way, 
you can see how the general market helped the individual stocks perform. 

Days to ultimate low. The median time to reach the ultimate low is a 
month for bull markets and about three weeks for bear markets. The table 
shows the average, which is longer in both bull and bear markets. 

Speed trap? I checked price velocity and found that bear markets see 
price drop almost twice as fast as bull markets. 

How many change trend? As a measure of how well the chart pattern 
works (trends), I counted how many big Ms saw price drop more than 20% 


Table 6.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 2,090 569 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R, 0% C 100% R, 0% C 
Average decline -17% -22% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -2% -11% 
Days to ultimate low 59 40 


How many change trend? 32% 51% 


66 Big M 


Table 6.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 298 or 14% 46 or 8% 
10 465 or 37% 81 or 22% 
15 374 or 54% 84 or 37% 
20 288 or 68% 70 or 49% 
25 232 or 79% 85 or 64% 
30 147 or 86% 58 or 75% 
35 96 or 91% 41 or 82% 
50 152 or 98% 79 or 96% 
75 36 or 100% 24 or 100% 
Over 75 2 or 100% 1 or 100% 


after the breakout. The thinking here is that a 20% move represents a trend 
change. For example, if the markets are bullish, a drop of 20% turns the mar- 
ket bearish. I applied the same measure to chart patterns. 

As the table shows, higher numbers of big Ms see price drop more than 
20% in bear markets as opposed to bull ones. This makes intuitive sense (it’s 
like a receding tide will lower all boats). I consider values above 50% to be 
exhilarating. 

Table 6.3 shows how failure rates climb for small drops after the break- 
out. For example, 298 big Ms or 14% of the patterns in bull markets failed to 
see price drop more than 5% after the breakout. Over a third (37%) failed to 
see price drop more than 10%. In bear markets, the pattern performs better, 
with 37% failing to see price drop more than 15%. 

You can use this table to help determine the chance of price making an 
extended decline. Want to make 50% after shorting your big M? Good luck 
with that. Only 2% in bull markets see price drop that far (that is, 98% fail to 
see price drop that far). 

Table 6.4 provides breakout and post-breakout statistics. 

Breakout direction. As I mentioned, if a big M breaks out upward, then 
you have a case of mistaken identity. Valid big Ms only break out downward. 

Yearly position, performance. You will see the big M pattern appear 
anywhere in the yearly price range. Bull markets seem to find them hiding 
near the yearly high almost half the time. Bear markets see the breakout price 
hibernating in the middle of the yearly price range most often. 

Mapping performance over the yearly price range doesn’t see any statisti- 
cally significant differences. 

Pullbacks. A pullback occurs after a downward breakout. Price must 
return to the breakout price within a month by definition. The table says that 


Table 6.4 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Statistics 67 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near L-17%, L-23%, 

the 12-month low (L), middle (M), M-17%, M -22%, 

or high (H) H -16% H -22% 
Pullback occurrence 67% 63% 
Average time to pullback bottoms -7% in 6 days -10% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -16% -20% 
Average decline for patterns with- -19% -27% 

out pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 60% 55% 
Performance with breakout day gap -17% -23% 
Performance without breakout day gap -16% -22% 
Average gap size $0.85 $0.48 


price drops 7% to 10% in 6 days and then returns to the breakout price in a 


round-trip total of 12 days. 


Patterns without pullbacks perform better than do those with pullbacks. 
That behavior is not unique to big Ms; we’ve seen it in other species of chart 
patterns. After a pullback completes, it resumes dropping 55% to 60% of the 


time on average. 


Gaps. Breakout day gaps don’t help or hurt performance much. Notice 
that the gap size in bull markets is almost twice the size of bear market gaps. 


Hmm. That's a surprise. 


I measured the median gap size (19 cents in bull markets and 21 cents in 


bear markets) and used those as the difference between tall and short gaps. I 
found that in bull markets, gaps taller than the median saw price drop an aver- 
age of 19% after the breakout. Short gaps lost just 16%. 

In bear markets, the results were 25% decline for tall gaps and 21% 
decline for short gaps. 

Table 6.5 shows size statistics for the big M. 

Height. We see that regardless of the market condition (bull or bear), tall 
patterns outperform short ones, but not by much. To compute this, measure 
the height of the pattern from the highest peak to the lowest valley between 
the two peaks and divide the result by the price of the lowest valley. If the result 
is larger than the percentage shown in the table, then you have a tall big M. 

Width. Width doesn’t offer any helpful performance improvement, 
although narrow patterns’ performance is slightly better (but probably 


68 BigM 


Table 6.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -18% -23% 
Short pattern performance -16% -22% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 12.4% 15.1% 
Narrow pattern performance -17% -23% 
Wide pattern performance -16% -22% 
Median width 26 days 26 days 
Short and narrow performance -16% -22% 
Short and wide performance -15% -22% 
Tall and wide performance -18% -22% 
Tall and narrow performance -18% -24% 


statistically insignificant). Measure the width of the pattern from peak to peak 
and compare it to the 26-day median. If the result exceeds the median, then 
you have a wide pattern. 

Height and width combinations. Upward breakouts show better per- 
formance if the big M is tall (regardless of width). Tall and narrow patterns 
outperform in bear markets. 

Table 6.6 shows that volume doesn’t play a key role in performance 
of big Ms. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward every two out of three trades 
on average. 

Rising/Falling volume. There’s no performance difference between big 
Ms with a rising or falling volume trend (as measured from peak to peak using 
linear regression). 

Breakout day volume. Only bear markets show better performance 
after heavy breakout volume. Heavy breakout volume typically leads to better 


Table 6.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 67% down 68% down 
Rising volume trend performance -17% -22% 
Falling volume trend performance -17% -22% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -17% -23% 


Light breakout volume performance -17% -20% 


Statistics 69 


Table 6.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 2% 0% 
Middle 16% 11% 
Pattern bottom 70% 68% 


performance for other chart patterns (not so much with downward breakouts, 
though, so it’s weird that big Ms are different). 

Table 6.7 shows a table new to this edition: how often price hits a stop. 

I split the pattern into three pieces: top, middle, and bottom. The top is 
the higher of the two peaks (B in Figure 6.3). The bottom of the pattern is the 
low at the valley between the two peaks (point C). The middle is, well, midway 
between the top and bottom. 

In bull markets, price reached the top of the pattern just 2% of the time 
on the way to the ultimate low (after the breakout). Although bear markets 
show 0%, I actually found two samples where price reached the top. 

If you wish to place a stop, then price will rise up to the middle of the 
pattern 16% of the time in bull markets, or recover (perhaps during a pull- 
back) to the bottom of the pattern 70% of the time. Bear markets show similar 
performance. 

In Table 6.8 I mapped the breakout date into one of three decades, which 
the table shows, split into performance in the top portion of the table and fail- 
ures in the bottom portion. Because bear markets only happened in the 2000s, 
they are not included in the statistics. 

Performance over time. The 1990s showed the best performance from 
big Ms, but not so’s you’d notice unless you traded a lot of them. 

Failures over time. Failures happened at about the same rate over all 
decades studied, with the 2000s showing the most and the 1990s showing the 
least. These “failures” are breakeven failures, that is, failure of the stock to drop 
more than 5% after the breakout. 


Table 6.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -18% 
2000s -15% 
2010s -16% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 13% 
2000s 16% 


2010s 14% 


70 Big M 


Table 6.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 693 or 38% 101 or 18% 
Single bust count 466 or 67% 57 or 56% 
Double bust count 15 or 2% 3 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 212 or 31% 41 or 41% 
Performance for all busted patterns 38% 34% 
Single busted performance 55% 55% 
Non-busted performance (big W) 46% 30% 


Table 6.9 shows how busted patterns performed. As you will recall, a 
busted big M happens when price breaks out downward, drops less than 10% 
(an arbitrary amount), reverses, and closes above the top of the big M (above 
the higher of the two peaks). The new, upward breakout busts the downward 
one. Multiple busts can follow. 

Busted patterns count. Because the sample count for big Ms was high, 
I found quite a number of busted ones, from a sprinkling in bear markets 
(18%) to over a third in bull markets (38%). That makes intuitive sense 
because the bear market trend will help take price lower. It reminds me of 
watching a barge move down river. The water level drops near shore and gets 
all churned up. As a kid, I was afraid I’d be pulled under while swimming or 
even canoeing (even though the barge was across the river, about a quarter 
mile away). 

Busted occurrence. Single busts happened most often followed by tri- 
ple busts. While you may find that odd (that double busts don’t come in sec- 
ond), you join me in my confusion. I’ve seen this trend in other pattern types 
and don’t have an explanation for why it happens. A double bust would send 
price lower (that is, the first bust sends price upward and the second bust turns 
price downward), if that is any help. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Grouping single, double, and 
three or more busts together sees price rise 38% after busted downward break- 
outs in bull markets. Separating out single busts, we see price rise an average of 
55% in bull markets (that’s measured from the top of the big M to the ultimate 
high). That’s a nice return if you can capture most of it. 

I used big Ws as a proxy for a non-busted big M. They don’t see price 
perform as well as their busted sisters. 

If you can find a busted big M, buy it and pray that price continues 
rising for a long time (a single bust). The 55% rise compares to a 46% 
average gain for big Ws (which break out upward). See the table for bear 
market results. 


Trading Tactics 71 


Trading Tactics 


Table 6.10 shows trading tactics for the big M pattern. 

Measure rule, targets. I’ll give an example of how to use the measure 
rule for big Ms in the sample trade. Use the measure rule to help gauge how 
far price will drop after the breakout. The rule is no guarantee that price will 
reach the target. 

The bottom portion of Table 6.10 shows how often price drops to various 
pattern heights. For example, using the full height in the measure rule calcula- 
tion in bull markets, price drops to the target 55% of the time. If you use half 
the height, the hit rate rises to 80%. 

Want to live dangerously? Price reaches a target farther away (twice or 
three times the height) less often, as the table shows. Bear markets show simi- 
lar hit rates, slightly outperforming their bull market counterparts. 

If you wish to buy the stock (long), you can use the measure rule num- 
bers to help determine the probability of a stock dropping to half, one, two, 
or three times the pattern’s height below the breakout. Just remember that 
anything can happen. Look for underlying support where the stock might turn 
and decide if it’s worth selling now before it drops that far. 


Table 6.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the height of the pattern from the price of the low between 
the two peaks to the higher of the two peaks. Subtract the height 
from the low between the two peaks. The result is the target price. 
Ignore results at or below zero. Larger percentage moves will be 
unlikely. The bottom portion of the table shows how often the meas- 
ure rule works. 

Stop location Place a stop at the location of your choice, using the results in Table 6.7 
as guidance. 

Pullback trade — Look for underlying support below the bottom of the pattern. Price may 
reach support and return to the breakout price in a pullback. Will that 
dip be deep enough to make money trading the pullback? 

Busted trade If you find a busted big M, then consider buying the stock and riding 
the recovery. 


Tips See text. 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 80% 82% 
Percentage reaching full height target 55% 58% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 26% 27% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 13% 15% 


Return to launch price 52% 59% 


72 Big M 


Another way to trade a big M is to wait for price to find support after 
the breakout. Consider buying then and riding the recovery. Don’t be fooled 
into buying the stock during a pullback. After a pullback completes, the stock 
resumes the plunge 55% to 60% of the time (see Table 6.4). 

Return to launch price. I also computed the percentage of time that 
price, at the ultimate low, met or dropped below the launch price. The last line 
in the table shows that it reached the launch price just over half the time in 
bull markets. 

One challenge of using this method is to figure out where the launch 
price is. Often it’s the same as the trend start (see the Glossary). The launch 
price is the location where price begins rising into the big M in earnest. In the 
first three figures of this chapter, the launch price is point A. In Figure 6.4, 
it’s point B. 

After you determine a measure rule target, convert the potential decline 
into a percentage of the current price. For example, if the height is $10 and 
the stock is trading at 50, that’s a potential 20% loss (10/50 x 100). Table 6.3 
says that in bull markets, big Ms fail to see a stock drop more than 20% about 
two-thirds (68%) of the time. That suggests a large decline probably won’t 
happen but your trade may be the exception. Visit with Table 6.3 and make 
the check. 

Stop location. Use Table 6.7 to help determine where a stop loss-order 
should be located. If you’re planning to short the stock, then do use a stop. 

After you locate the stop, determine if the potential loss is big enough 
that you might need to reconsider the stop location. If you can’t find a reason- 
able loss value (like 8% or less), then abandon the trade. Another big M will 
come along shortly. I saw the schedule. 

Pullback trade. This setup idea should be used only by experienced trad- 
ers. You can place an order to short the stock a penny below the bottom of the 
big M and cover at the bottom of the pullback. Table 6.4 can help determine 
your chance of making money using this technique. 

In more than two out of every three trades (67% in bull markets, from 
Table 6.4) a big M will show a pullback within a month of the breakout, often 
in the first week. 

Price drops for an average of 6 days and returns to the breakout price 
(or near it), in a roundtrip total of 12 days. The drop from the breakout to the 
low at the bottom of the pullback attempt measures 7% to 10% (for bull and 
bear markets, respectively). If you short the stock a penny below the breakout 
and place an order to cover the short 5% to 7% lower than the breakout, you 
might be able to catch the drop and make a profit. 

The median decline is 6% (bull market) to 8% (bear market) in 5 days 
(for both markets). 

Busted trade. Another way to trade a big M is to buy the stock long if 
the big M busts. After busting a downward breakout, price soars an average of 
55% for a single busted pattern. Even if you only capture half of that, it’s still a 


Trading Tactics 73 


big gain. See Table 6.9 for details. The trick is to pick single busted trades, so 
look for overhead resistance within 10% of the breakout price, which might 
send the stock scurrying for cover. 

Tips. I don’t have any trades in big Ms to share with you because I don’t 
like to short stocks. However, I do have some tips I want to pass on from what 
I’ve learned studying them in the bush. 

Look at Figure 6.4 with a big M at CE. Notice the knot of support circled 
at I. If I was shorting this stock, this knot of support would be my first choice 
for where the stock will turn. 

The knots need not be midway up from the launch price (but they do 
tend to be about midway). That is, it’s about midway up the move from B to C. 

What you want to look for is 3 days (or more) of horizontal price move- 
ment. Not a loose meandering of price, but a tight sideways move with lots of 
overlap. H is a good example of what to look for, but it’s often shorter than 
what’s shown. I is a good example. The two weeks to the left of B shows a third 
example of what to look for (not the placement in the BC run, but the type of 
horizontal move you’re looking for). Sometimes it’s only 3 or 4 days wide, but 
it’s enough to support price. 

The knot of support should be the first one be/ow the confirmation price. 
In this example, D is the confirmation price of the big M. Notice that price 
drops to F and finds support at I. As a price target, pick the Aighest price in 
the knot. Chapter 1 gives a good tutorial on knots, so reread that if you need 
a refresher. 

Here’s another scenario. Price moves up like you see from B to C. How- 
ever, the closest knot of support is below the price of a prior peak (looking back 
a year or two). That prior peak will act as support, and the stock will likely turn 
there. In other words, as price drops, it first finds support at the prior peak, and 
if it were to continue down, it would then find support at a knot along the BC 
run. The high price of the peak would be my target. 

In another scenario, you'll see price confirm the big M and then reverse. 
Price climbs a few percent (up to 4% or so) above the top of the big M and 
then reverses. Often a strong move down follows. 

It’s like traders push up the stock to hit stop-loss orders placed by the 
shorts, and once they are out of their positions, they drive price lower, clean- 
ing the table. 

What I’m describing is an example of a double busted big M. Those are 
nasty for shorts unless they time it right. How do we play this scenario? Price 
closes above the top of the big M, busting the downward breakout and then 
reverses to head back down. That’s the time to short. 

Finally, in a number of cases, I saw a large gap open as price climbed up to 
the big M (during the BC rise). The top of those gaps supported price on the 
way down, so they make for a good price target. 

Table 6.11 shows information that I mentioned previously but decided 
to put in a table for your viewing pleasure. 


74 Big M 


Table 6.11 
Special Features 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Higher left peak, performance 16% 22% 

Higher right peak, performance 17% 22% 

Even peak, performance 18% 19% 

Median days from launch price to left peak 27 23 

Median days from right peak to ultimate low 49 40 


Higher peak performance. I looked at performance based on which peak 
of the big M was above the other (or even). In bull markets, a higher right peak 
suggests better performance. I would have guessed that a lower right peak would 
suggest a weak situation, but maybe a higher peak means there’s farther to drop. 

Time to drop. I measured the median time to rise from the launch price 
to the first peak compared to the drop from the right peak to the ultimate low. 
The time is about two to one. So you can measure the time from the move up 
to the first peak, double it, and that will give you an estimate of how long you'll 
need to remain in the trade to reach the ultimate low. My guess is it won’t be 
that easy, but at least you'll have an estimate. 


Sample Trade 


Justin is an experienced trader, and he’s shorted enough stocks to become pro- 
ficient at it. “I got interested right there.” In Figure 6.4, he pointed to the 


Evolent Health, Inc (EVH) 


he Pe ha! 


Man aie: 
iy att, | | 

a rae \ Gm, : 

Mi y 15 

Migoel dt B 14 

ahs NW 13 

yf 12 

i 1 


7 
17 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan18 Feb Mar Apr May Jun jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 6.4 Justin shorted this big M and lost money on the trade. 


Sample Trade 75 


strong drop the day after peak E and made plans to trade the big M (the twin 
peaks at C and E). 

Price started a concerted effort to climb when it broke out of a conges- 
tion region at B. Price paused at H and moved sideways for a time when it hit 
overhead resistance set up by the sideways move from August to November 
2017 (shown by a horizontal line connecting circle H). 

He checked a wider view of the chart to see where support and resistance 
were located. The daily chart showed a ceiling of overhead resistance block- 
ing an advance higher (line A). Price at the top of the big M, peaks C and E, 
smacked against that resistance and ducked. 

“T checked the weekly chart going back to 2015, but didn’t see much 
support between D and H. But look at H. It’s tight with lots of overlap as 
price moves sideways. Very nice.” A loose-looking congestion region has price 
meandering all over the place, but H looked different. “H is my target. I think 
the stock will drop that far.” 

“What about the knot at I?” I asked and circled it on the chart. “It'll 
support price. It’s an energy barrier. When Chakotay and Seven hit one, they 
crashed. You don’t want that to happen.” 

He made a funny face. 

“It’s from Star Trek: Voyager.” 

“T like football, baseball, and soccer: any sport with a ball.” 

I wondered how he felt about polo, but decided not to ask. I pointed 
to [ again. 

“It’s too close to the breakout. The stock will blow right through that 
without pausing and head down to H. Trust me. I do this for a living. I know 
what I’m talking about.” 

My face didn’t move a muscle, but inside I grinned and thought that his 
money was about to become someone else’s. 

He used the measure rule to determine how likely it would be for price to 
reach H. The top of the pattern is at C, 24, and the bottom is at D, 20.60, for a 
height of 3.40. The top of the region at H is at 14.50, or 1.75 times the height 
of the big M below the bottom of it. 

From Table 6.10, he calculated a 48% chance of reaching point H by 
interpolating the numbers of 55% (.55) of patterns reaching the target using 
the full height, and 26% (.26) of them using the 2x height. That is, .26 + 
(.55 —.26) x .75 = 48% chance of the stock dropping to H. The .75 number is 
75% of the distance from 1 to 2, which is where H (1.75 times the height) sits. 

How did he feel about a 48% chance of success? He looked at me and 
cocked an eyebrow. “Yuck,” he said. 

For grins, he computed the height of the big M (3.40) and divided it by 
the breakout price (20.60) to get a value of 16.5%. According to Table 6.5, 
the pattern was tall, making him feel better. He considered B to be the launch 
price, and ‘Table 6.10 said there was a 52% chance of reaching it (the last line 
in the table). 


76 Big M 


The two values were different: a 48% chance of reaching H and a 52% 
chance of reaching B, which was further away. Hmm. Maybe a subspace anomaly 
would be involved. I didn’t say anything to Justin because a ball wasn’t involved. 

He had an order to short the stock if it dropped a penny below the low at 
D, or 20.59. He placed an order to cover the short at 17.03 (his target), above 
the top of the region at H, and above round number support at 17. Once the 
short triggered to open the trade, he placed a stop to exit the trade should price 
rise a penny above C, or 24.01. 

Then he sat back and watched disaster unfold. The stock broke out down- 
ward at F, placing him in the trade, and it hit the energy barrier at the price of 
I. As I left his house, I started whistling the Voyager theme song. 

The stop covered his position at G for a loss of 3.42 a share, not including 
commissions. 

What did Justin do wrong? I think he should have anticipated a pullback 
at the energy barrier (the knot at the price of I). After that, though, I would 
have expected the stock to resume the downward move to H. Table 6.4 says 
that 60% of the time, price does resume the downward move. Fortunately he 
had a stop in place to protect his backside while he waited for the Voyager crew 
to rescue him. 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price forms twin bottoms at or near the same price with an unusually tall 
left side, often looking like a big W. 


Upward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish Short-term bullish 
reversal reversal 

Performance rank 11 out of 39 8 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 9% 9% 
Average rise 46% 30% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Throwbacks 64% 66% 
Percentage meeting price target 74% 55% 
See also Bearish bat, double bottoms (all varieties) 


A big W is nothing more than a double bottom with a tall left side. It 
might have a tall right side, too, but that depends on how well the stock per- 
forms after an upward breakout. If price doesn’t break out upward, then it’s not 
a big W. I’ll discuss identification guidelines later. 

The above Results Snapshot shows important performance numbers for 
the big W. For example, the breakeven failure rate, at 9%, is quite good (mean- 
ing relatively small compared to other chart pattern types). The average rise 
for perfect trades is 46% (bull market), which is also good, hence the rank of 


77 


78 Big W 


11 where 1 is best. Bear markets see price climb by 30%, which ranks 8 out of 
20, where 1 is best. 

If you use the full height of the pattern in the measure rule computa- 
tion, price will reach the target 55% to 74% of the time (bear, bull markets, 
respectively). 

Let’s look at examples of big Ws. 


Tour 


Figure 7.1 shows what a big W looks like. The pattern has the first bottom at 
B, the second one at D, with a hill in between, C. The pattern confirms as valid 
when price closes above the top of the hill. 

The left side of the pattern begins at A, which is what I call the launch 
price. The stock drops in a straight-line run down to the first bottom of 
the big W. 

After the big W forms the second bottom, price recovers. In this example, 
the stock rises to E in a quick sprint higher from the low at D. That’s still well 
short of the launch price, A. After point E, the stock is like a speedboat pulling 
a water skier. You get a lot a thrust to get the skier on top of the water (to E) 
and then the boat planes out (on the way to F). It’s possible that the stock will 
recover and post a new ultimate high, so F is tentative until more data arrives. 

Volume (G) has a U-shape (in this example) until the spike at D. Linear 
regression says volume trends upward from bottom to bottom, so that’s why 
I drew the line sloping higher at G. Volume for the big W trends downward 
most often, though. 


Beacon Roofing Supply Inc. (BECN) 


\\ - 


18 Feb Mar Apr May jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 7.1 This big W sees price rise, but not very far. 


Identification Guidelines 79 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 7.1 shows identification guidelines for the big W and refer to Figure 7.2 


for guidance. 


Appearance. The big W is a form of double bottom, one with a tall left 
side, and if the pattern works as it’s supposed to, a tall right side as well. The 
two valleys should bottom near the same price (use your best judgment as to 


Characteristic 


Table 7.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


Appearance 


Price trend 


Volume 


Breakout direction, 
confirmation 


Duration 


Apr May Jun 


Price forms twin bottoms at or near the same price with an unusu- 
ally tall left side. A well-formed pattern should remind you of a big 
W (that is, if price on the right side rises to match the left). 

Downward, leading to the first bottom. Look for a long, steep drop 
often at least the height of the pattern (from the lower of the two 
valleys to the peak between the valleys) above the top of the pat- 
tern. See text. 


Downward the majority of the time, but don’t exclude a big W with 
a rising volume trend. 


To break out, price has to close above the peak between the two 
bottoms, confirming the pattern as valid. Without an upward 
breakout, you don’t have a big W. 


No minimum duration and the longest pattern | studied is about 9 
months wide. 


Continental Building Products Inc (CBPX) 


4 
I Hy ] 


Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May = Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 7.2 Price at F almost returns to the launch price, A. 


80 Big W 


how close the bottoms need to be to each other). Often the bottom-to-bottom 
variation is small (the median is 14 cents). 

Price trend. The downtrend from A to B is a steep drop like that shown 
in the figure. You want to avoid patterns that see price meander or even move 
sideways as the drop approaches B. If price takes its time reaching the first bot- 
tom, then the chart pattern is probably a double bottom (see one of the Adam 
& Eve varieties). 

Eyeball the height from the center peak between the two bottoms to the 
lower of the two bottoms. Then make sure the left side of the pattern is at least 
that height above the central peak. 

For example, the height of the big W is the high price at point C minus 
the low at B. The left side must be at least this height above C. In this case, the 
downtrend begins at A, which is well above C, so the downtrend from A to B 
is tall enough. A tall left side is what separates big Ws from double bottoms. A 
big W is a type of double bottom, but few double bottoms are big Ws. I hope 
that makes cents (sense). 

Volume. Don’t disqualify a big W because of its volume trend. However, 
most of the time, you'll see volume trending lower from valley B to D. Linear 
regression on the big W shown in the figure says volume slopes upward. It 
doesn’t /ook like it does, but the numbers say otherwise. I show the upward 
trend at H. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. Price always breaks out upward 
from a big W. If it doesn’t, then you don’t have a big W. A breakout occurs 
when price closes above the hill between the two bottoms. In Figure 7.2, that 
would be a close above C, which I show as a horizontal line at E. 

Price confirms the big W as a valid chart pattern when it closes above C. 
Again, if you don’t have confirmation, then you don’t have a big W. 

Duration. I did not set a minimum or maximum width between the two 
valleys. They ranged from a very narrow 4 days to 260 days. I looked at the 
4-day pattern, and it looks fine. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 7.3 shows what the failure of a big W to perform looks like. The big 
W is at ACB, with A and B being the bottoms and C being the hill between the 
bottoms. Price drops from H ina long and steep move to the first bottom. The 
stock confirms the pattern as valid at D, where it closes above the horizontal 
line drawn from the high at C. 

Price spikes higher at E, but closes the trading day near the bottom of 
the price bar, at F. That close is below the lower of the two bottoms (A). The 
breakout from this big W was upward (at D), but price reversed and closed 
below the bottom of the big W, busting the upward breakout. 


Statistics 81 


Alkermes (ALKS) 


telly, : 
hy ha 

fi Ly er af 2 

Ja 4 ‘ a Which 4 ‘ M ‘, a4 


| . " 30 
29 
ht *y 28 
f 27 
by E 26 
D 25 
ec i 2 
My A i . 23 
| Hy i A My 22 
A B F WV iy! 
j Wi 20 
i 19 
G 18 
17 
16 
15 
18 Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 7.3 Price busts the upward breakout from this big W. 


Volume (G) in this example slopes upward from A to B. Table 7.6 says 
that volume slopes downward 69% of the time on average, and yet all three 
figures shown so far have upward volume. 

Why did this big W fail to rise back to the launch price (H), the point 
where the long downtrend leading to point A began? 

We can only speculate as to the answer. I checked the Internet for news 
at price bar EF and found that the company released second-quarter earnings 
before the market opened. Apparently the stockholders couldn’t make up their 
minds about the news. Sometime during the day, price climbed up to E (per- 
haps on news that the company settled a patent dispute). Once price dropped 
below bottom B, it may have triggered stops, helping price decline to F. In this 
case, it appears the earnings announcement prevented the big W from fulfill- 
ing its promise of rising to H. 


Statistics 


Table 7.2 shows general statistics for the big W pattern. 

Number found. Most of the patterns I found manually over the years 
but automated finding them to highlight big Ws I might have missed (like 
the one shown in Figure 7.3). I checked each one to be sure it was a proper 
pattern. I uncovered almost 2,700 patterns in 765 stocks using data from July 
1991 to September 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some 
no longer trade. 


82  BigW 


Table 7.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 2,172 514 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R, 0% C 100% R, 0% C 
Average rise 46% 30% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% 1% 
Days to ultimate high 213 83 
How many change trend? 62% 47% 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. The big W is a reversal 
pattern. Price enters the pattern from the top (going down) and exits out the 
top (going up), reversing the inbound downtrend by definition. 

Average rise. The average rise is decent in bull markets, with gains aver- 
aging 46%. That’s if you trade it perfectly, over 2,000 times. Your trades may 
do better or worse than what’s shown in the table. As you would expect, bear 
markets with upward breakouts see price climb less far than in bull markets. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. I measured performance of the S&P 
500 index from the date of the big Ws breakout to the ultimate high. The table 
shows the result, which is inferior to the big W’s performance. I’m not sure if 
the comparison is fair. It might be like comparing the times of two marathon 
runners, one who is top ranked and the other who is an amateur. The top- 
ranked runner will have a better time than one who walks the 26 miles. 

Days to ultimate high. To gain 46%, it takes time, about 7 months in 
bull markets. Bear markets see gains taking less time (about 3 months), but 
that’s because the average rise is less, 30%. However, a check of the numbers 
says the velocity in bear markets is higher than in bull markets, even when a 
rising price trend is heading against the current in bear markets. The bear 
market velocity is almost twice as fast as in bull markets. It might be because of 
the lack of a posted speed limit. 

How many change trend? I counted how many big Ws saw price rise 
more than 20% after the breakout, and I must say, the bull market posts a ter- 
rific number (ranking sixth and eighth for bull and bear markets, respectively). 

Big Ms in bear markets show good performance, too, but not as good as 
in bull markets. That’s expected, of course (a rising tide lifts all boats in bull 
markets, but bear markets depress performance after upward breakouts). 

Table 7.3 shows cumulative failure rates for big Ws. The breakeven fail- 
ure rate is 9%. That means 9% of the big Ws fail to see price rise more than 
5% after the breakout. 

Look at how the failure rates climb. In bull markets, 20% fail to see price 
rise more than 10%. 


Table 7.3 


Cumulative Failure Rates 


Statistics 83 


Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 201 or 9% 48 or 9% 
10 229 or 20% 85 or 26% 
15 206 or 29% 82 or 42% 
20 185 or 38% 57 or 53% 
25 177 or 46% 45 or 62% 
30 141 or 52% 36 or 69% 
35 144 or 59% 32 or 75% 
50 296 or 73% 45 or 84% 
75 248 or 84% 44 or 92% 
Over 75 346 or 100% 40 or 100% 
Table 7.4 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 100% up 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L48%, L31%, 


12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


Throwbacks occurrence 

Average time to throwback peaks 

Average time to throwback ends 

Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 


Percentage price resumes trend 


Performance with breakout day gap 
Performance without breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


M46%, H42% M29%, H28% 


64% 

8% in 6 days 
12 days 
45% 

48% 

76% 


47% 
46% 
$0.38 


66% 

11% in 6 days 
12 days 

27% 

34% 

60% 


39% 
28% 
$0.47 


Want to make 50% on your trades? You'll lose 73% of the time in bull 
markets (that’s one winner and three losers, and that’s if you trade it per- 
fectly). In bear markets, the results are even worse with 84% failing to climb 


more than 50%. 


Set realistic goals and realize that you'll have to make more on winning 
trades to compensate for losing ones. Trading perfectly also helps. . . (that’s a 
joke, but focusing on improving technique often leads to making more profit). 

Table 7.4 shows breakout and post-breakout statistics. 


84 BigW 


Breakout direction. All big Ws break out upward. If they don’t, then 
they are not big Ws. 

Yearly position, performance. I sorted patterns according to the break- 
out price and checked performance of the three ranges. 

The best performance for both bull and bear markets comes from big Ws 
near the yearly low. The worst performance comes from those near the yearly 
high. It suggests that bottom fishing (buy low, sell high) works better for big 
Ws than momentum trading (buy high, sell higher). 

Throwbacks. A throwback happens after the breakout when price 
rises but quickly returns to the breakout price (within 30 days). Often price 
resumes the rise thereafter. In Figure 7.1, for example, the throwback peaks 
at E before returning to the breakout price. Figure 7.2 shows a throwback 
after point E. 

Throwbacks occur about twice every three trades. Price peaks in 6 days 
after rising between 8% and 11%, on average, before completing the trip back 
to the breakout price (or nearly so) in 12 days (that’s the roundtrip total). 

Notice that price does better if a throwback is absent. We’ve seen this 
behavior in other chart patterns, too. How can you tell if a throwback will hap- 
pen? Look for nearby overhead resistance, such as prior peaks, round numbers 
(10, 20, 30, and so on), or sideways price movement between the breakout 
price and about 10% higher. If you see some, then expect a throwback. In my 
trading, I always expect a throwback will happen, and I party when they don’t. 

The vast majority of the time, between 60% (bear market) and 76% (bull mar- 
ket), price will resume the upward move after a throwback completes. Few things are 
more aggravating than placing a buy stop a penny above the breakout price, getting 
into the trade perfectly, only to see a throwback take price lower. Sometimes, the 
stock continues down below the bottom of the pattern and you're stopped out. Then 
you sit on the sidelines as the stock recovers and soars like an eagle. Fortunately, this 
type of behavior is rare for big Ws (Table 7.9 says it happens 20% or less). 

You can always wait for a throwback to complete before making a trade. 
However, if you wait, you'll miss investment opportunities where a throwback 
doesn’t occur (that is, you’ll miss the best performers). 

Gaps. Breakout day gaps push price higher, meaning performance is bet- 
ter if a gap appears. However, in bull markets, the extra push probably won’t 
be enough to wake you from a sound sleep. In bear markets, it’s more of a jolt. 

How can you tell if price will gap higher? I’ve no idea. However, I meas- 
ured performance from the opening price the day after the gap to the ultimate 
high. So if you see a gap, you can buy into the situation and maybe score extra 
performance points for doing so. 

Table 7.5 shows how the sizes of big Ws perform. 

Height. Tall big Ws perform better than do short ones. To use this find- 
ing, measure the height of the big W from the peak between the two bottoms 
to the lower of the two bottoms. Divide the result by the breakout price (the 
price of the peak between the two bottoms). If the result is bigger than that 
shown in the table, then you have a tall pattern. 


Statistics 85 


Table 7.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 48% 31% 
Short pattern performance 44% 29% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 11.9% 16.2% 
Narrow pattern performance 45% 30% 
Wide pattern performance 47% 30% 
Median width 23 days 21 days 
Short and narrow performance 44% 30% 
Short and wide performance 44% 26% 
Tall and wide performance 49% 32% 
Tall and narrow performance 48% 29% 
Table 7.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 69% down 74% down 
Rising volume trend performance 45% 25% 
Falling volume trend performance 47% 31% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 46% 33% 
Light breakout volume performance 46% 24% 


Width. Bear markets don’t see a performance difference, but in bull 
markets, wide patterns perform slightly better than narrow ones. The median 
width between narrow and wide is about 3 weeks (see the table). The width is 
the time between the two bottoms. 

Height and width combinations. Patterns that are tall and wide out- 
perform the other combinations of height and width. You might want to avoid 
short patterns (either narrow or wide). They underperform in bull markets and 
don’t do that well in bear markets. 

Table 7.6 shows volume statistics for the big W pattern. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most of the time, as measured 
using linear regression between (and including) the two bottoms of the big W. 
As I mentioned, don’t discard a big W because it has an unusual volume trend. 
Remember, the trend is your friend. 

Rising/Falling volume. Patterns with falling volume, as measured 
from bottom to bottom in the big W, perform best in both bull and bear 
markets. The bear market shows the biggest difference between the two 


86 BigW 


values (31% versus 25%). The 25% number comes from 136 samples, so 
additional samples will likely narrow the gap. 

Breakout day volume. Bull markets don’t see a performance difference, 
but bear markets do with heavy breakout volume helping performance. The 
difference seems unusually wide, though, so additional samples will likely nar- 
row the spread. 

Table 7.7 is one of my favorite tables because this kind of trading infor- 
mation can pay for the price of this book. 

How often are stops hit? I placed a stop-loss order at the peak between 
the two bottoms and price touched this (after the breakout and on the way to 
the ultimate high) over 70% of the time. Scoot the stop a bit lower (the middle 
of the big W, measured from the peak to lowest valley) and the stop triggers 
less often, between 13% and 20% of the time. Place it at the lower of the two 
bottoms and it'll hardly trigger at all. 

The safe place to locate a stop-loss order is below the bottom of the big 
W, but the distance between the stop and the buy price may entail a large 
potential loss. The rumors are true: Positioning a stop is an art you need to 
master to become a successful trader. 

Once you decide where to place the stop, convert the potential loss into 
a percentage of the current price. If you gasp at the result, then the stop is too 
far below the current price. Either adjust the stop location, abandon the trade 
altogether, or hope the trade succeeds. 

Table 7.8 shows how big W performance has changed over three dec- 
ades. Because bear markets only occurred in the 2000s, they were excluded 
from consideration. 


Table 7.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 73% 75% 
Middle 20% 13% 
Pattern bottom 2% 1% 
Table 7.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 42% 
2000s 51% 
2010s 45% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 8% 
2000s 8% 


2010s 11% 


Statistics 87 


Performance over time. The 2000s were the outstanding decade for 
performance with gains averaging 51%. The worst performance came in the 
1990s with the 2010s nestled comfortably between those two. 

Failures over time. I would expect to see low failure rates in the 2000s 
because that was the best performing decade, and yet the table shows it’s tied at 
8% with the 1990s. The 2010s showed a slight uptick in failures. The failures 
I’m reporting on, by the way, are 5% failures. They count how many big Ws 
fail to see price rise more than 5% after the breakout. 

Table 7.9 shows statistics related to busted patterns. 

Busted patterns count. Big Ws rarely bust, as the table shows (com- 
pared to other patterns, which see busts in the 40% range). What does this 
mean? Up to 20% of the time, on average, price will fail to rise more than 10% 
after the breakout before reversing and closing below the bottom of the big 
W. So if you want to make a lot of money, then one in five trades won’t exceed 
10% profit, on average, and that’s if you trade it perfectly. 

Busted occurrence. For those patterns that busted, I sorted them into 
one of three bins: single, double, and three or more busts (triple+). The table 
shows single busts happening most often followed by double and triple busts. 
In some other pattern types, we see triple busts coming in second place, so big 
Ws behave themselves. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Compare the performance for 
all busted patterns (drops of 15% in bull markets) with the performance of 
big Ms (not Ws). Big Ms see price drop an average of 17% after a downward 
breakout, and they act as the proxy for a non-busted big W. 

Busted pattern performance for big Ws is not as good as trading a big M 
chart pattern. However, if you are lucky enough to trade a single busted big W, 
then price drops an average of 23% (in bull markets). That’s exceptional for a 
bearish pattern; of course, your mileage may vary. 

How can you tell if the big W will single bust (as opposed to double or 
triple bust)? I’ll leave that as an exercise for the reader (translation: I have no 
idea, but focus on nearby overhead resistance that might turn price down or 
the timing of an earnings announcement). 


Table 7.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 389 or 18% 105 or 20% 
Single bust count 220 or 57% 78 or 74% 
Double bust count 123 or 32% 19 or 18% 
Triple+ bust count 46 or 12% 8 or 8% 
Performance for all busted patterns -15% -18% 
Single busted performance -23% -22% 


Non-busted performance (big Ms) -17% -22% 


88 Big W 


Trading Tactics 


Table 7.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to help determine how far 
price may rise after the breakout. The lower portion of the table shows the 
numbers. Before I get there, let me explain how to use the measure rule. 

Measure the height of the big W by subtracting the lower price of the 
two bottoms from the price of the highest peak between the two bottoms. Add 
the height to the peak between the two bottoms to get a full-height target. The 
table says that price will reach that target 74% of the time in bull markets. 

If you use different multiples of the height (half, 2x, or 3x), you will see 
different hit rates. For example, if you like to hold onto a stock and target three 
times the height, compute the height as already described, multiply it by three, 
and add it to the breakout price. Price will reach the target 39% in bull markets 
but only 17% in bear markets. 

Stop location. Use Table 7.7 to help determine where to place a stop. 
You can use a volatility stop, which is based on how volatile a stock is, to locate 
your stop. Often [Il stick a stop below a nearby minor low and double-check 
that with a volatility stop. See the Glossary for details on volatility stops. 

Return to launch price. Look back at Figure 7.1. Point A is the launch 
price. It’s the price where the stock begins the decline in earnest, leading down 


Table 7.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Measure the height of the pattern from the lower of the two bot- 


toms to the high between the two bottoms. Add the height to the 
high price between the two bottoms. The result is the target price. 
Large percentage moves will be unlikely. The bottom portion of 
the table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Stop location Place a stop at the location of your choice, using the results in 
Table 7.7 as guidance. 

Launch price Determine where the launch price is and use that as a target. 

Higher second If the right bottom shows higher volume than the left one, expect 
bottom volume better performance (in bull markets). 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 

Percentage reaching half height target 88% 77% 

Percentage reaching full height target 74% 55% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 53% 31% 

Percentage reaching 3x height 39% 17% 


Return to launch price 70% 51% 


Trading Tactics 89 


Table 7.11 
Special Features 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Lower left bottom, performance 46% 29% 
Lower right bottom, performance 47% 30% 
Even bottom, performance 38% 34%" 
Higher left volume, performance 45% 31% 
Higher right volume, performance 49% 27% 
Median days from launch price to left bottom 22 21 
Median days from right bottom to ultimate high 92 51 
Large rise between valleys, performance 48% 30% 
Small rise between valleys, performance 44% 29% 
Median rise between valleys 14% 26% 


* From 18 samples. 


to the big W. Unfortunately, the launch price can be hard to determine in some 
cases, so I use the measure rule to give better targeting guidance. 

However, the stock can return to the launch price after a big W breaks 
out. Keep that in mind when setting targets. Look for price to stall just short 
of the launch price. Figure 7.2 shows an example of that. The launch price is 
point A and price climbs to F, which is just below the price of A. 

The last line in the table shows the stock returns to the launch price 70% 
of the time, on average, in bull markets. To use this finding, convert into a 
percentage the distance from the current price to the launch price. If it’s a high 
percentage, then it’ll probably be unrealistic. 

You can run the potential gain by Table 7.3. For example, if the current price 
is 40 and the launch price is 50, that means a gain of 25% or ((50 — 40)/40 x 100). 
Table 7.3 says that almost half (46%) will fail to see price rise more than 25%. 

Table 7.11 shows features that might improve trading a big W. 

Lower valley performance. I checked the performance of big Ws where 
the price of the left bottom was above, below, or equal to the right bottom. 
There wasn’t much of a performance difference except for big Ws where the 
price of both bottoms was the same. When that happened, performance suf- 
fered, and quite substantially. 

Higher bottom volume. I found that if the right bottom of the big W 
has volume higher than the left bottom, patterns outperform in bull markets 
and underperform in bear markets. Because the bull and bear market values 
show opposite performance results, it concerns me that this finding won’t be 
reliable. Use it with caution. 


90 Big W 


Time to launch. I measured the time from the launch price to the first 
bottom and compared it to the time from the second bottom to the ultimate 
high. The numbers show that the drop into the big W is short, about three 
weeks, but the recovery is long. In bull markets, the median is about four 
times as long. 

Rise between valleys. I compared the height of the peak between the 
two bottoms of the big W to performance. If the rise was taller than the median 
(measured as the height from peak between the two bottoms to the lower of 
the two bottoms divided by the price of the lower of the two bottoms), then 
performance improved. In bull markets, the differences are pronounced com- 
pared to bear markets. 


Experience 


I have traded the big W a number of times, but all from the buy side so the les- 

sons learned aren’t as important as those on the sale side. To put it another way, 

it doesn’t matter at what price you buy. It only matters at what price you sell. 
Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Abercrombie & Fitch Co. 


Abercrombie & Fitch Co. (ANF) in 2017 had been trending lower for almost 
a year after peaking in March 2016. I saw a big W forming and thought this 
would make for a good bottom-fishing trade. 

Here’s what I wrote in my trading notebook. “Buy reason: Extra cash. 
I’m hoping that this will be the start of a rebound, a fallen angel-type play. 
Earnings were good and the stock shot up and then threw back, as expected. 
It should recover from here, based on a good earnings surprise. If not, then 
sell when it gets in the 10+ range to keep the [dollar] loss small. The odds 
don’t favor this trade, but I’m betting the stock has bottomed and will recover 
from here.” 

The earnings announcement saw price climb from 11.69 to a high of 
13.75 the next day, or almost 18%, but it retraced most of that gain by the time 
I bought on 10 March. I received a fill at 11.68. The position size was small, 
about one-fourth of what I normally trade, and that told me I was concerned 
about the stock. 

I sold the stock (at 10.92) after the report of weak same-store-sales num- 
bers less than 2 weeks after I bought, taking a 7% loss. 

This was one of those trades where the smart money is just waiting to 
trap you. I sold the day price bottomed. The stock recovered but only to 12.46 
before dropping again. The stock bobbed up and down, eventually making 
another big W in August and September 2017, which was the real bottom. 


Experience 91 


From there, the stock climbed from its confirmation price of 10.49 to peak at 
29.20, or 178% higher. 

My instincts were good. I picked a stock that almost tripled except the 
timing was wrong. I missed entering a winning trade by 6 months. 

I made a perfect entry, buying after a throwback completed, and sold on 
the day price dropped (but didn’t close) below the bottom of the big W. If I had 
waited for price to close below the bottom of the big W, I would have stayed in 
the trade longer but would have taken a slightly bigger loss. 

The big question comes from a curious mention in my notebook: “The 
odds don’t favor this trade.” 


¢ Lesson: If the odds don’t favor the trade, then don’t make it. 
¢ Lesson: Keep the position size small if you believe a trade is risky. 


Teradyne Inc. 


I made a trade in Teradyne Inc. (TER) as the stock emerged from the 2007- 
2009 bear market. A big W confirmed and I bought in at 5.94 on 1 May 2009. 
The stock threw back but then cooperated and climbed. 

Later in the year it moved sideways until August 2010, when it resumed 
its upward move. Here’s what I wrote in my notebook: “Sell reason: Hit stop. 
This sold on reaction to market weakness, so my guess is I sold too soon. I 
expect a rebound, but you can’t be too sure.” 

I sold within a week of the stock peaking and before it dove by more than 
40%. I made 194% on the trade (I almost tripled my money!). 

This is one of those trades you want to climb up on the roof of your house 
with a megaphone and shout at your neighbors that you’re rich. Of course, 
you’d be gunned down by the rednecks surrounding your house like a moat, 
so don’t do that. 

There is no lesson to share with this trade. A perfect entry and perfect 
exit led to a nice reward for holding onto the stock for 1.8 years. 


Ann Taylor 


In Ann ‘Taylor (ANN), the stock made a big dive, forming the left side of the 
big W in late 2006. I bought on 1 February 2007, at a price of 35.19. This was 
a late entry by about 2 weeks, and yet if I had bought at a penny above the 
confirmation price, I would have entered the trade at a lower price: 33.82. My 
preferred entry method is to place a buy stop a penny above the breakout price. 

On the sale, here’s what I wrote: “21 March 2007. I decided to sell this 
using a trailing stop set between today’s close and the low +.01 as the cents 
margin (11 cents) [I think this has to do with setting an automated trailing 
stop with my broker]. Hopefully, this will move up in the morning and I can 


92 Big W 


get out at a higher price than just selling at the open. The market was up big 
today, and this stock was one of the few to close lower. It’s running up against 
SAR [support and resistance] at 39-40, as predicted. My guess is it’ll form a 
handle and backtrack. I don’t want to wait around, though. I think the com- 
pany sucks because SSS [same-store-sales] are soft despite positive comments 
from the company.” 

I received a fill at 39.09. Four trading days later, the stock peaked at 39.92, 
before entering the bear market and seeing the stock bottom at 2.41, or 94% 
below where I sold. I made 11% on the trade. 


¢ Lesson: Buying as soon as the stock breaks out of a chart pattern is 
often better than waiting. 


Energy East Corp. 


With Energy East Corp. (EAS), I saw a big W forming and price didn’t con- 
firm the pattern before heading back down to the price of the first bottom, 
where I bought. I received a fill at 23.12. 

The stock cooperated, for a time, by rising but eased lower and looked to 
be heading down about 3 weeks after I bought. I sold it for a 2% loss so I could 
deduct it on my taxes. 

From my notebook: “Sell reason: End-of-year tax-loss selling. This is 
going down, I predict, so it’s time to dump it and lower my cap gains taxes. 
This H&S [head-and-shoulders] bottom didn’t work as expected.” 

The head-and-shoulders became apparent after I bought (which hap- 
pened at the right shoulder low), and it never confirmed by the time I sold on 
30 December 2005, at 22.69. 

This trade contradicts the prior lesson. If I had placed a buy stop a penny 
above the top of the big W, I would have entered the trade at 24.06, well above 
my 23.12 purchase price. The big W didn’t confirm until 10 January 2006, 
where the stock continued up to make a vertical run for 8 days (peaking at 
25.57). Then it moved sideways to down for 1.5 years. 

Isold on the day the stock started to climb in that vertical rise. Bad exiting 
timing, that’s for sure. But I would have collected dividends from the electric 
utility only if I had continued to hold the stock, so selling was a good choice. 


Sara Lee Corp. 


Sara Lee Corp. (SLE) in September 2008 was another buy into a big W that 
didn’t confirm. I lost 4% on that trade when the stock hit my stop and contin- 
ued lower in the 2007-2009 bear market. 


¢ Lesson: If premature breakouts are a concern, wait for confirmation 
before entering a trade. 


Sample Trade 93 


Swift Transportation Co. 


In Swift Transportation Co. (SWFT), I played the big W differently. I bought 
when price returned to the launch price, expecting a strong move higher as 
oil prices were trending downward: “Sell reason: The stock has made a large 
down move today, following the market lower and others in the industry [are] 
down. I believe this will move lower, forming a handle to the big W.” 

A handle did form, and I sold in the early part of that development at 
19.25, for a loss of 8%. I watched from the sidelines as price climbed to 33.66. 
I missed out on a potential gain of 75%. Sigh. 

Again, I picked the right stock, but it took me out when it formed a han- 
dle before making a strong push higher. 

I don’t have a lesson to share except the idea of riding price higher after 
it reaches the launch price might have merit. Test it to be sure it can work for 
you and your markets. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 7.4 shows this chapter’s sample trade with the big W located at AC. 
Before I discuss the trade, let’s apply the measure rule to this pattern. 

The measure rule uses the height of the big W. The peak (B) between 
the two bottoms has a high price of 12.66. The lower of the two bottoms is C, 
at 11.27, for a height of 12.66 — 11.27 or 1.39. Add the height to the price at 
the peak (C) and you get a target of 12.66 + 1.39 or 14.05. Price will reach the 
target 74% of the time in bull markets, according to Table 7.10. If you want a 


Era Group Inc (ERA) 
H 


We Ny Pai 
aon lie 
: i A bay rahe / 
nal \ t c if 


ale Vy z k 
1 my AA AH) , sid i | WM, 0 
Ws wr MS 


6 
18 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb 


Figure 7.4 John decided not to trade this big W because of overhead resistance. 


94 Big W 


closer target, take half the height and use that. Thus, a closer target becomes 
12.66 + 1.39/2, or 13.36. Price reaches the half-height target 88% of the time. 

Want to know if the big W is tall? Take the height (1.39) and divide it by 
the breakout price (12.66) to get 1.39/12.66 x 100 or 11.0%. Table 7.5 says that 
a tall pattern needs to have a value above the median 11.9%, so this pattern is 
short. That suggests underperformance. 

The launch price is at H, where the downtrend begins. H could be a post- 
breakout target, but as you can see, the stock didn’t climb that far. 

Volume trends downward (G), so that’s good for performance (from 
Table 7.6). It may be difficult to tell from the chart, but the left bottom has 
volume of 492 shares and the right bottom has volume of 791. In other words, 
the right has higher volume and that’s good for performance (from Tables 7.10 
and 7.11). 

The pattern is short (bad), volume trends downward (good), and the right 
bottom has higher volume than the left (good). This seems to suggest a better 
performing big W. Of the three measures, the height is the most important and 
it was bad. That’s not a good omen. 

How did John trade the stock? “I didn’t.” 

“Why not?” 

“I used your simulator to scan charts and didn’t like what I saw. I looked 
for a horizontal move followed by a big W.” 

He was referring to my Patternz software (available for free on my web- 
site at www. ThePatternSite.com), which has a trading simulator built into it. 
It will advance to a chart pattern and then play back price at the speed of 
your choice. 

“I saw setup after setup which didn’t work so I decided not to trade the 
stock. Sometimes the best trade you can make is none at all.” 

However, another setup is similar to this situation. Imagine the same 
setup with price forming a top, moving sideways (D), and dropping to a chart 
pattern (a big W or other type of chart pattern). Price does its thing, and the 
stock eventually climbs to close above H (the high point in the horizontal D 
move). That’s the time to buy. I describe this setup at http://thepatternsite. 
com/CPSetup.html (Note: case is important). 

In Figure 7.4, price broke out upward from the big W (a close above B) 
the day before E. That confirmed the big W as a valid chart pattern. Then 
price stalled as if the bulls were afraid of attacking overhead resistance set up 
by the sideways move at D. 

The stock collapsed, and when price closed below the bottom of the big 
W, at FE it busted the upward breakout. The stock recovered to poke its head 
above 13, but moved lower to bottom at 8.11 in December. Had John bought 
at the breakout price and sold at the ultimate low, he would have lost 36%, not 
including commissions and fees. He made the right decision to walk away from 
this trade. 


8 


Broadening Bottoms 


agi 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price trends downward, leading to the chart pattern. The pattern looks 
like a megaphone with higher highs and lower lows that widen over time. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 

Breakeven failure rate 

Average rise 

Volume trend 

Throwbacks 

Percentage meeting price target 
Synonyms 

See also 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average drop 

Volume trend 

Pullbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


Long-term bullish reversal 

15 out of 39 

16% 

45% 

Upward 

69% 

65% 

Broadening triangle, five point reversal 


Broadening tops 


Short-term bearish continuation 
23 out of 36 

26% 

15% 

Upward 

62% 

41% 


95 


96 Broadening Bottoms 


Broadening bottoms are middle-of-the-road performers because the 
breakeven failure rate and average rise or decline are mediocre. I’ve traded 
this pattern only a handful of times over the years but made a profit 75% of 
the time. Even though performance needs improvement, maybe you can make 
money trading the pattern. Let’s see what broadening bottoms have to offer. 


Tour 


Figure 8.1 shows an example of a broadening bottom. This particular one is 
called a five-point reversal because there are five alternating touches, two minor 
lows (2 and 4) and three minor highs (1, 2, and 3). A five-point reversal is also 
rare: In one study, I located only 5 in the 77 broadening bottoms I examined. 

Price trends downward in late August and reaches a low 2 days before the 
chart pattern begins. That brief dip is what I call undershoot, where the stock is 
so excited as it drops, it dips below the beginning of the chart pattern within 2 
weeks of its start. lignore brief dips and overshoot—a brief rise within 2 weeks 
of the pattern’s start—when determining the trend start (see the Glossary for 
details) leading to a chart pattern. Price overshooting or undershooting the 
formation start is common in many chart pattern types. 

How does a broadening bottom differ from a broadening top? A 
broadening bottom has price trending downward into the start of the pattern; 


Banc One Corp. (Bank, NYSE, ONE) 


Ih -32 
rs Mh N 231 
|ut 


its 


| | - 24 

i fod at Partial Decline 23 
‘a 

-22 


Aug 94 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 8.1 A broadening bottom, specifically a five-point reversal, so-called 
because of the five touchpoints: two minor lows (the even numbers) and three 
minor highs (the odd numbers). 


Identification Guidelines 97 


a broadening top has price trending up. The difference is arbitrary. I made the 
distinction thinking that the two might behave differently. 

If you ignore undershoot in this case, the broadening bottom appears at 
the bottom of the downtrend, hence the pattern is a broadening bottom and 
not a top. 

This particular chart pattern shows a partial decline which correctly pre- 
dicts an upward and immediate breakout. Price moves down from 26 to 24.50, 
reverses course, and shoots out the top. The stock reached a high of 38.50 just 
over a year later. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 8.1 lists identification guidelines for broadening bottoms. 

Appearance. The shape of the broadening bottom reminds me of chaos 
theory where small disturbances oscillate back and forth, then grow unbounded, 
wreaking havoc. 

In the stock market, price begins to bounce between two imaginary bar- 
riers that diverge, forming a megaphone shape. When you draw a trendline 
touching the minor highs along the top and another connecting the minor 
lows along the bottom, the broadening pattern becomes apparent. Neither 
the top nor bottom trendlines should be horizontal or near horizontal. Rather, 


Table 8.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Megaphone shape with higher highs and lower lows. 
Price trend The short-term price trend should be downward, leading to the 


broadening bottom. Ignore any overshoot or undershoot within 2 
weeks of the start of the broadening bottom. 


Trendlines Price follows two diverging trendlines: The top one slopes upward and 
the bottom one slopes downward. 

Touches Should have at least five touches: three on one trendline and two 
on the other, but not necessarily alternating touches. Each touch 
should be a minor high or a minor low. 


Whitespace Price should cross the pattern from top to bottom plenty of times, 
filling the pattern with price movement, not leaving a large hole of 
whitespace. 

Volume The volume trend from the start to end of the pattern is usually 


upward. Don’t discard a pattern because volume trends downward. 


Breakout direction A breakout occurs when price closes above the formation’s high 
(upward breakout) or below the pattern’s low (downward break- 
out). See text for details. The breakout can occur in either direction, 
and price may move horizontally for months before breaking out. 


98 Broadening Bottoms 


price along the peaks becomes higher and price along the bottoms trends 
lower. Use the figures in this chapter for guidance. 

Price trend. Price trends downward into the start of a broadening bot- 
tom. Even if price rises a week or two before the chart pattern begins (over- 
shoot), ignore it. The pattern is still a bottom. This arbitrary designation makes 
intuitive sense: A bottom should appear at the end of a downtrend, not when 
price is climbing to the moon and not if price spiked upward just before the 
pattern started. 

Trendlines. Two trendlines drawn across the minor highs and lows out- 
line the pattern. The top trendline should slope up; the bottom one should 
slope down. The diverging trendlines distinguish the broadening bottom from 
other types of chart patterns, such as the right-angled broadening formation 
(which has one horizontal trendline) and the broadening wedge (both trend- 
lines slope in the same direction). 

Touches. To prevent confusion, I changed the guidelines to require at 
least five touches, three of one trendline and two of the other. Fewer touches 
increase the likelihood of misidentification (but it still might be a broadening 
bottom). Play it safe and look for at least five trendline touches. 

Each trendline touch should be at or near a minor high (top trendline) 
or minor low (bottom trendline). What is a minor high or low? A minor high 
happens when price trends up, then drops back down, leaving a clearly defined 
peak. A minor low is just the same except flipped upside down: Price moves 
lower, and then heads back up, leaving a clearly defined valley. 

In Figure 8.1, odd numbers tag the minor highs and the even numbers are 
the minor lows. Let me stress that the minor highs and lows need not be alter- 
nating, as shown in the figure. Just as long as you can count at least five touches, 
then that’s fine. If price cuts through a trendline, then don’t count that as a touch. 

Notice that at the start of this pattern (on the bottom), price cuts through 
the lower trendline, but it doesn’t count as a touch. 

Whitespace. Figure 8.2 shows a problem with identification. This is 
from 3M (MMM) in August 2019. On the left side (“Bad”), the stock appears 
to make a broadening bottom. It has two touches of the top trendline and three 
on the bottom, as required. The problem is that white hole in the pattern, 
which I highlight at A. Price does not cross the pattern enough to fill the space. 

Compare the left side with the right side (“Better”). It’s the same picture 
except I show a down-sloping channel. It’s not perfect because of the spike at 
B, but it’ll do. This is a better interpretation of a viable chart pattern compared 
to the left side. Do zor cut off a turn like ’ve shown on the left side and call it 
a broadening bottom. 

Volume. There is nothing magical or important about volume. I used 
linear regression from the start of the chart pattern to its end and found that 
volume trends upward most of the time in this chart pattern. 

Breakout direction. The breakout price can be difficult to identify in a 
broadening chart pattern as the pattern develops. I look for the place where 


Identification Guidelines 99 


Better 


Figure 8.2 Don’t accept patterns with too much whitespace. This happens when 
you cut off a turn and call it a broadening bottom. 


price pierces the up or down trendline or makes an extended move, hugging 
the trendline. 

If price closes outside a trendline boundary, then the penetration point 
becomes the breakout price. If price moves up (for example) and follows along 
the top trendline without piercing it, then I backtrack to the prior minor high 
and draw a horizontal line forward in time until price closes above the hori- 
zontal line. When that happens, that is the breakout point (providing the pat- 
tern obeys the other identification guidelines first). Use the same logic for a 
downward breakout. 

Let me give you an example. Consider the broadening bottom shown in 
Figure 8.3. Where’s the breakout from the broadening bottom? 


Alkermes (ALKS) 


MWh, D 2 a al iim wl " 
LT My 1 ve t ul (Av 
hich" 


A 


7 


Jan 05 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 8.3. Where's the breakout? 


100 Broadening Bottoms 


If you wait for price to close above the top trendline, then you’d have to 
wait until C. Imagine if the top trendline were steeper. You might never see 
a breakout. 

If the pattern meets all of the identification guidelines (especially trend- 
line touches) and price begins sliding upward (along the top trendline or 
downward along the bottom one), like you see from B to D, then go back to the 
prior minor high (upward breakout) or prior minor low (downward breakout) 
and use that price as the breakout price. In this case, point B is the prior minor 
high in the chart pattern and the breakout is point D. If you worry about buy- 
ing into the broadening bottom too late, then skip the trade. Chart patterns are 
not like attending a party 15 minutes late. Promptness pays. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 8.4 shows a typical broadening bottom failure. Price trended down 
from the March high. On 19 March (E), the company announced the pricing 
of a secondary public offering of nearly 8 million shares of common stock. The 
stock price took a hit and shares tumbled that day and the next, just before the 
start of the broadening bottom. 

The broadening bottom formed innocently enough with price swinging 
from low to high (A). Price touched the top trendline three times and the bot- 
tom trendline three times, as one would expect in a well-behaved broadening 
bottom (meaning at least 5 touches). 


Assurant Inc (AIZ) 


18 Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 8.4 This broadening bottom breaks out downward, reverses, and busts 
the downward breakout. 


Statistics 101 


At B, the stock broke out downward from the broadening pattern when 
price closed below the lower trendline. Because price trended downward going 
into the pattern, a trader might expect a downward breakout, too (so the pat- 
tern acted as a continuation of the downward price trend). Indeed, they might 
expect price to drop back to just above the December 2018 low (F). 

However, the stock surprised traders when it stalled at C. It was even 
more of a shock when the stock began to stair-step higher and closed above the 
top of the pattern at D. At D, the stock busted the downward breakout. After 
that, the stock was an airline taking off and flying into the clouds. 

The behavior of the broadening pattern shown in the figure represents 
what I call a 5% failure. Price breaks out lower but fails to continue moving in 
the breakout direction by more than 5% before heading back up. The reverse 
is also true for upward 5% failures: Price climbs after an upward breakout by 
no more than 5% before tumbling. 


Statistics 


Table 8.2 shows general statistics for the broadening bottom chart pattern. 

Number found. I dug up 1,238 patterns in 667 stocks starting from 
August 1991 to September 2019 but removed the bear market ones because 
they were too few when sorted by breakout direction. Not all stocks covered 
the entire range, and some no longer trade. Both up and down breakouts are 
for bull markets. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, a bottom- 
ing pattern has price entering the pattern from the top. A pattern acting as 
a reversal sends price out of the pattern upward (reversing the downtrend). 
A continuation pattern breaks out downward (continuing the downtrend). 

Average rise or decline. Price posts a 45% rise after an upward break- 
out, helped along by a bullish general market. Downward breakouts suffer 
when price tries to drop in a bullish market. That’s like swimming against 
the current. 


Table 8.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 599 405 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% C 
Average rise or decline 45% -15% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 14% -2% 
Days to ultimate high or low 240 47 


How many change trend? 52% 29% 


102 Broadening Bottoms 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The performance of the index can’t 
compare to the performance posted by the chart pattern. That’s typical, but 
I’m not sure it’s a fair comparison. We’re comparing a perfect trade to the 
index, using the same dates as the broadening bottom trade. It does show that 
broadening bottoms can beat the indices, and it also shows that the general 
market helps performance. 

Days to ultimate high or low. This is a measure of how long price takes 
to reach the ultimate high or low (after the breakout). For upward breakouts, 
itll take about 8 months of worry to reach the ultimate high. Downward 
breakouts take about 6 weeks to drop 15%. 

If you compare the ratio of 45% in 240 days to 15% in 80 days, we dis- 
cover that price drops nearly twice as fast as it rises. That might be a hint for 
options traders. You might be able to reach your price target faster during a 
downtrend than an uptrend. 

How many change trend? Over half of broadening bottoms with 
upward breakouts see price rise more than 20% after the breakout (which is 
good). Downward breakouts suffer, with only 29% dropping more than 20%. 
The best patterns see price forming strong and lasting trends. 

Table 8.3 shows failure rates. How do you measure failure? It took a 
while before I was able to answer that. I measured the move from the break- 
out price to the ultimate high or low and sorted the results into bins. Then I 
counted how many entries I had in each bin. It’s like sorting coins you found 
under the seat cushions into piles of dimes, nickels, and quarters, and then 
counting how many dimes you found, and how many nickels, and so on. 

If the breakeven cost of trading is 5%, then we see that 16% of the pat- 
terns with upward breakouts will fail to see price rise more than 5%. Down- 
ward breakouts are worse, with 26% of them failing to drop more than 5%. 

Notice how the failure rates climb. Almost half (46%) of downward 
breakouts see price drop no more than 10%. Ouch. 


Table 8.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 98 or 16% 106 or 26% 
10 71 or 28% 80 or 46% 
15 60 or 38% 67 or 62% 
20 56 or 48% 36 or 71% 
25 33 or 53% 34 or 80% 
30 34 or 59% 25 or 86% 
35 26 or 63% 26 or 93% 
50 55 or 72% 27 or 99% 
75 68 or 84% 4 or 100% 


Over 75 98 or 100% 0 or 100% 


Statistics 103 


What does this mean? Trading chart patterns and expecting a huge gain 
is unrealistic. Large gains happen, sure, but you might want to invest for the 
long term (buy and hold) or stick to swing trading and nibble off what you can. 
Keep your expectations realistic. 

Table 8.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. This just in: Broadening bottoms break out upward 
more often than downward! 

Yearly position, performance. I sorted the breakout price into one of 
three bins, depending on where it was in the yearly high-low price range. The 
best performance came when the breakout price was near the yearly low. The 
worst was when it was near the yearly high. That suggests bottom fishing (buy 
low, sell high) works better for the broadening bottoms than momentum trad- 
ing (buy high, sell higher). 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. The next several rows in the table dissect 
throwbacks and pullbacks. If you don’t know what a throwback or pullback is, 
ask your mom (or check the Glossary). 

Throwbacks happen 69% of the time. Price breaks out upward from a 
broadening bottom, rises for a week by an average of 6%, and then returns to 
(or comes close to) the breakout price by day 12. 

If you’re an experienced swing trader, you might want to short a down- 
ward breakout and close the position in a week or when price drops 7%. How- 
ever, the median decline is just 5%, so it might not be worth it. 


Table 8.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 60% up 40% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L48%, L-16%, M-13%, 


12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


M 45%, H 43% 


H-11% 


Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 69% 62% 

Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 6% in 7 days -7% in 7 days 

Average time to throwback/pullback ends 12 days 12 days 

Average rise/decline for patterns with 43% -14% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 

Average rise/decline for patterns without 48% -16% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 

Percentage price resumes trend 75% 49% 

Performance with breakout day gap 48% -14% 

Performance without breakout day gap 44% -15% 

Average gap size $0.63 $0.74 


104 Broadening Bottoms 


Anyway, I compared the performance of broadening bottoms with and 
without throwbacks or pullbacks and found that the pattern performs better 
without a throwback or pullback happening. That’s not a surprise because I’ve 
seen that behavior in other chart patterns, too. 

After a throwback or pullback ends, the stock resumes moving upward 
75% of the time after an upward breakout and drops 49% of the time after a 
downward breakout. Be careful when thinking you can short after a pullback 
completes. Price might continue rising instead (51% do). 

Gaps. Do breakout day gaps help performance? Sometimes. Gaps are 
not a big indicator of future performance. I checked the statistics for vari- 
ous types of chart patterns (double bottoms, head-and-shoulders, and so on), 
and the average performance improvement is one percentage point. Upward 
breakouts in bull markets saw price climb by two percentage points if they had 
a gap. That’s for all non-Fibonacci chart patterns. In other words, there’s not a 
big performance difference when you average all the numbers together. 

For broadening bottoms, gaps help performance by an average of one to 
four percentage points, depending on the breakout direction. The gap size is 
slightly larger after a downward breakout, and that might have something to 
do with how price drops faster than it rises. 

Table 8.5 shows pattern size statistics. This is one of my favorite tables 
because height is usually the best indicator of future performance. 

Height. Tall patterns outperform. What is meant by ta//? Compute the 
height of the pattern from the top of the broadening pattern to the bottom and 
divide the result by the breakout price. A tall pattern will have a ratio larger 
than that shown in the table for the associated breakout direction. 


Table 8.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 48% -17% 
Short pattern performance 42% -12% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 12.0% 13.2% 
Narrow pattern performance 46% -14% 
Wide pattern performance 44% -16% 
Median width 41 days 39 days 
Short and narrow performance 39% -13% 
Short and wide performance 49% -11% 
Tall and wide performance 42% -17% 


Tall and narrow performance 63% -17% 


Statistics 105 


Warning: Just because a pattern is tall does not mean it'll outperform. 
The numbers are an average of hundreds of perfect trades. Plus, you might 
flub the trade anyway. 

Width. Width is not as strong an indicator for future performance as is 
height. The table shows an example of this, too. After an upward breakout, nar- 
row patterns outperform but wide ones do better after downward breakouts. 

To determine width, measure the calendar days from the start of the 
pattern to the end and compare the result to the median width in the table. 
A value higher than the median means it’s wide. 

Height and width combinations. According to the table for upward 
breakouts, if tall patterns outperform and narrow patterns outperform, you’d 
expect the combination of tall and narrow to be the best performer. Indeed, 
that’s what happens, but that’s not always the case. 

For downward breakouts, tall and wide patterns should outperform, but 
the results show that anything tall is best. Avoid short patterns. 

Table 8.6 shows volume-related statistics. If the height table is my 
favorite, then volume is at the other end. I think traders put too much emphasis 
on volume. Remember that for every share sold, one is bought. If an institution 
buys a gazillion shares, they are probably buying it from another institution 
that is selling a gazillion shares. 

Volume trend. Volume trends higher most often in the chart pattern. 

Rising/Falling volume. I sorted performance by the trend direction and 
found that patterns with a rising volume trend outperform. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout day volume only sees improved 
performance for broadening bottoms after upward breakouts. 

Table 8.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. You can use 
this information to help locate a stop-loss order, should you decide to use one. 
I’m not being cute here. Investors (buy-and-holders) should not use a stop in 
my opinion. Shorter-term traders would be wise to use a well-placed stop or a 
mental stop (if you have the willpower to obey that). 

I sliced the chart pattern in half and measured how often price during a 
trade returned to touch the top, middle, or bottom of the chart pattern. See the 


Table 8.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 65% up 67% up 
Rising volume trend performance 46% -15% 
Falling volume trend performance 43% -14% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 46% -15% 


Light breakout volume performance 43% -15% 


106 ~— Broadening Bottoms 


Table 8.7 
How Often Stops Hit 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 77% 1% 
Middle 23% 15% 
Pattern bottom 3% 73% 

Table 8.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 40% -17% 
2000s 46% -14% 
2010s 46% -14% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 15% 13% 
2000s 17% 30% 
2010s 17% 31% 


Glossary (“Stops”) for details on how I did this in case you’re interested. (Hint: 
I didn’t use power tools.) 

If you place a stop at the top of the pattern, price will take out the stop 
77% of the time after an upward breakout. Downward breakouts will only 
reach the top of the pattern 1% of the time. That makes sense, doesn’t it? 

Table 8.8 shows the performance over three decades. How has the pat- 
tern performed over time? Let’s find out. 

Performance over time. Upward breakouts in the 1990s suffered but 
downward breakouts did better. I can’t explain why. The 2000s contained not 
one but two bear markets, but I excluded those results from the table. 

Failures over time. The 1990s were the worst performers, but they have 
the best (lowest) failure rates. Again, this puzzles me. Because the failure rate is 
a function of performance, then I’d expected patterns that showed big moves 
to have lower failure rates. They don’t. 

Table 8.9 shows busted pattern performance. At one time, I thought that 
busted patterns were the way to make a bundle trading chart patterns. They 
can be, but it’s not as easy as you might expect. 

Busted patterns count. I counted the number of busted patterns and 
found that 42% of broadening bottoms with downward breakouts will bust. 
Ouch. It’s less painful for upward breakouts, with a quarter of them busting. 

Busted occurrence. If we sort the busted patterns into three bins, single 
busts, double busts, and three or most busts (triple+), we see the results in the 
table. Notice that most of the busts are single ones. 


Trading Tactics 107 


Busted and non-busted performance. The last three lines in the table 
show the performance of busted and non-busted ones. Notice that single 
busted patterns perform better than all busted patterns (single, double, triple+) 
and also beat the non-busted pattern performance. 

Perhaps now you understand why trading busted patterns might be the 
way to riches. Probably not, but we can dream. Try looking for a single busted 
downward breakout from a broadening bottom. Then try to carve out a por- 
tion of the 46% average rise. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 8.10 shows trading tactics for broadening bottoms. 

Measure rule. The first tactic is to determine how much money you are 
likely to make in a trade. The measure rule helps with the prediction, but it’s 
not a guarantee. 

‘To use the rule, compute the height by subtracting the highest high from 
the lowest low in the broadening bottom. Add the results to the highest high 
to get the target price for upward breakouts and subtract the height from the 
lowest low for downward breakouts. 

For downward breakouts, if the prediction says the stock will drop below 
zero, then ignore it. For both breakout directions, use common sense. A large 
gain or loss probably won’t occur. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how well the measure rule works. 
Based on the full height, a stock will reach an upward target 65% of the time, 
but a downward target is harder to reach. It works just 41% of the time. 

You can change the height in the computation to assess how often 
price will reach a target. I provide a few possibilities (from half the height to 
three times). 

Let’s use Figure 8.5 to make the computation clear. Point A shows the 
highest high in the chart pattern at 14.13. The lowest low is point B at 12. 


Table 8.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 149 or 25% 169 or 42% 
Single bust count 84 or 56% 111 or 66% 
Double bust count AO or 27% 8 or 5% 
Triple+ bust count 25 or 17% 50 or 30% 
Performance for all busted patterns -15% 32% 
Single busted performance -24% 46% 


Non-busted performance -15% 45% 


108 


Trading Tactic 


Broadening Bottoms 


Table 8.10 
Trading Tactics 


Explanation 


Measure rule 


Go long 
at the low 


Long stop 
Go short 


at the high 
Short stop 


Move stops 


Partial 
rises/declines 


Stop location 
Busted trade 


Description 


Compute the difference between the highest high and the lowest low 
in the broadening bottom. Add or subtract this value from the break- 
out price. The result is the target price for upward and downward 
breakouts, respectively. The bottom portion of this table shows how 
often the measure rule works. 


After recognizing a broadening pattern, buy after the stock makes its 
turn at the lower trendline. 


Place a stop-loss order 15 cents below the prior minor low to protect 
against a trend reversal. 


Sell short after price starts down from the top trendline. 


Place a stop 15 cents above the minor high to protect against an 
adverse breakout. Cover the short when price turns at the bottom 
trendline and starts moving up. For a downward breakout, cover as it 
nears the target price or any support level. 

Raise or lower the stop to the next closest minor low or high once price 
makes a new high (for long trades) or low (for short sales). 


If a broadening bottom shows a partial decline or rise, trade accord- 
ingly (on a partial decline, go long; on a partial rise, short the stock). 
Partial rises work 53% of the time, and partial declines work 73% 
of the time. 


Use Table 8.7 to help determine stop location. 


Busted patterns perform slightly better than non-busted ones. See 
Table 8.9. 


Up Breakout Down Breakout 


Percentage reaching half height target 
Percentage reaching full height target 
Percentage reaching 2x height 
Percentage reaching 3x height 


81% 70% 
65% 41% 
46% 18% 
35% 7% 


The formation height is the difference between the two, or 2.13. Add the value 
to the high to arrive at the upward price target, or 16.26. 

For the downward target, subtract the height from the lowest low (that is, 
12 — 2.13 or 9.87). You can see in Figure 8.5 that the price never quite reaches 
the downward price target. 

Go long at the low. Once you have uncovered a broadening bottom 
with the identification guidelines met, you can think about trading it (as price 
crosses from side to side). 

When the price bounces off the lower trendline, buy the stock. Sell when 
price turns down. The downturn may occur as a partial rise partway across 


Experience 109 


the chart pattern, or price may cross completely to the other side, touch the 
top trendline, and head down. Remember, the formation may stage an upward 
breakout, so don’t sell too soon and cut your profit short. 

Long stop. In a rising price trend, place a stop-loss order 15 cents below 
a prior minor low. Should the stock reverse and head down, you will be taken 
out with a small loss. As the stock rises to the opposite side of the chart pattern, 
move your stop upward to 15 cents below the prior minor low. The minor low 
may act as support, so you will be giving the stock every opportunity to bounce 
off support before being cashed out. 

Go short at the high. The trading tactic for downward breakouts is the 
same. When price touches the top trendline and begins moving down, short 
the stock. Only advanced traders should attempt to short a stock. 

Short stop. Place a stop-loss order 15 cents above the highest high in the 
formation, then pray that price declines. 

Move stop. If luck is on your side and the stock heads down, move your 
stop lower. Use the prior minor high—place the stop 15 cents above it. 

Partial rises/declines. If the stock makes a partial rise or decline, con- 
sider acting on it. The table shows how often they work (partial declines work 
best). Take advantage of them when they appear, but make sure you place a 
stop-loss order in case the trade goes bad. 

Once price breaks out from the broadening pattern, consider selling if 
the price nears the measure rule target (this is most useful for short-term swing 
trades). There is no guarantee that the price will hit or exceed the target, so be 
ready to complete the trade, especially if there is resistance between the cur- 
rent price and the target. The stock may reach resistance and turn against you. 

Stop location. Table 8.7 shows how often price will reach one of three 
locations in the chart pattern. The results give you some indication of how risky 
a stop location may be. You may wish to consider using a volatility-based stop. 
See the Glossary (“Volatility stop”) for sliated (that’s details spelled backward). 

Busted trade. Busted patterns, on average, outperform the non-busted 
counterparts. Table 8.9 discusses options for trading busted patterns. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Southwest Airlines 


Southwest Airlines (LUV) hit turbulence in late 1999 going into the start of 
2000. A broadening bottom formed. Here’s my notes from my trading notebook: 
“25 January 2000. I bought at market as the stock was moving up off the bottom 
of a broadening bottom chart pattern. At 15 3/8 [not split adjusted], the stock 
is cheap and shows support at this level. Oil prices are high, meaning fuel costs 


110 Broadening Bottoms 


will continue to hurt; interest rates are rising and expected to move up 1/4 point 
next Wednesday at the FOMC [Federal Open Market Committee] meeting. 
However, as a long-term holding, it’s a good price to add to my position. I only 
bought a few shares because this could break down through the bottom of the 
pattern and move lower. In that case, Pll buy more. If fuel costs were stable, the 
earnings of this beast would improve (according to a Wall Street Journal article), 
so it’s a good buy even though the general market is trending lower.” 

As I read this, I see lots of warning signs, especially with the market trend- 
ing lower. You want to trade with the trend, not try to push against it. However, 
I bought at the right time because the stock lifted off the runway (at the bot- 
tom trendline) and climbed. 

The stock threw back and bottomed at the price of the bottom trendline 
again before making its way up to cruising altitude. 

Fast-forward to June 2000. Price had peaked and had retraced 18% off 
the high set in early May. Here’s my notebook entry for the sale: “27 June 2000. 
I sold my entire holdings because the stock has pierced the support base of a 
descending triangle [meaning the triangle had a downward breakout]. With 
seasonal performance moving up in December and peaking in the spring, I 
missed the high by about $3/share. Ouch. Oil prices are high, raising fuel costs, 
and interest rates are still high, maybe moving up more. So, it looks like the 
excitement is over although today the stock is up almost $1.” 

I sold and made 27% on the trade. As good as that sounds, I sold at the 
day the stock bottomed. After that, it climbed by 89%. Well, spit! This keeps 
happening if you read about my trades. The day I sell the stock bottoms and 
makes a substantial rise. It’s one of those Catch-22 scenarios. If I hold on, the 
stock will continue down. If I sell, it’ll double in price, thumbing its nose as I 
watch from the sidelines. 


¢ Lesson: Assess how far price might drop before selling. The trade 
might be worth holding onto longer if the downside risk is limited. 


Hercules Inc. 


I wrote about Hercules Inc. (HPC) as a potential pipe bottom trade (weekly 
scale), but it’s also a broadening bottom on the daily scale. Let me tell you how 
I traded the broadening bottom. 

The stock made a nice-looking broadening bottom in May and June 
2007. It included a partial decline that correctly predicted an upward breakout. 

Did I take advantage of the partial decline? No. My notes don’t tell why, 
either. I bought the day after an upward breakout. A better move would have 
had a buy stop placed at the top of the broadening bottom for a more timely 
and lower-priced entry. Or I could have bought earlier because of the partial 
decline (which is more risky). 


Sample Trade 111 


Here’s my notebook: “Buy reason: Broadening bottom and potential pipe 
bottom. This is also a measured move up pattern [MMU]. The MMU began 
in August 2006 and peaked in March, corrected to [the] June low, and is now 
moving up in the second leg.” 

If the measure move were to fulfill its promise, ’d make a bundle because 
the pattern was huge. The first leg rise was 60%. If the second leg was close to 
the same length, well, I’d be happy. 

Additional notes to the trade were skeptical of the measured move work- 
ing as expected, even after taking half the first leg height and using that as a 
projection for a target. “Just 45% meet the target so it’s likely this will die at 
the old high [21.40].” Half height target came out to be 21.52, suggesting a 
stall at the old high. 

This was a swing trade, a short-term one where the potential profit 
from where I bought wasn’t big. I used a volatility-based stop and raised it 
four times along the way to 27 July, when I was stopped out. The market 
dropped 500 points over 2 days, and it pulled the stock down far enough to 
trigger the stop. 

I sold at 20.36 and made just 1% on the trade. That was just 3 trading 
days after the stock peaked at 22.48. So I got close to a perfect exit. 

The stock appeared to make a 2B pattern. Price exceeded the old high 
of 21.40 by coasting up to 22.48 before moving below 15 in a series of roller- 
coaster swings. If I had placed an order to sell my shares at the 21.40 target, 
I’d have done better. 


¢ Lesson: A better entry was to have a buy stop set at a penny above 
the top of the chart pattern and not wait for confirmation. The par- 
tial decline correctly signaled an upward breakout, so that would help 
boost confidence that a lower entry price was the correct choice. 

¢ Lesson: For short-term swing trades, set a limit order to sell at the 
target price. 


Sample Trade 


Sharon likes to think of herself as the brains in the family. While her husband 
is suffering in foul weather as a carpenter, she is hammering away at her key- 
board, a slave to her computer masters. She uses profit from her swing trading 
to build their emergency fund. “Last month I found a pair of Manolo Blah- 
niks.” She sighed. “It was a shoe emergency.” She glanced at me. 

My eyebrow ticked up. “A shoe emergency?” 

She nodded. “Let me show you. . .” 

We're old friends, so I grabbed her arm. “Stop right there!” I knew that 
once she started showing me her collection, I’d be there all day. 


112 Broadening Bottoms 


Acuson Corp (Medical Supplies, NYSE, ACN) 


] -16 
Ay Stock Shorted 
-15 
I ft (' Cc S Partial Rise 
il t My | [2 Then Downward 
| 7 f My Breakout 
tt gta, gtd ul, 
ee : meee Nm { 
Support 
Level 
| aco Covered 


Price 
Target 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 8.5 A broadening bottom with five alternating touches. Expect an imme- 
diate downward breakout because a partial rise appears. 


Sharon is not afraid to short a stock, given good profit potential and an 
especially weak fundamental or technical situation. It is a stressful life, but 
making money often is. 

“When I spotted the broadening bottom,” she said (shown in Figure 8.5), 
“I became interested.” 

The stock reached a high of 37.38 in early November 1991 and had been 
heading down since. 

“With the stock trading at 14, I wondered how much downside remained, 
so I drew the two trendline boundaries and counted the number of alternating 
touches.” Three are labeled as numbers in the figure and points A and B are 
the remaining touches. 

“Because the stock was near A, heading down, I guessed that it would 
break out downward on the next cross. I did research to try to prove it, and 
then I shorted the stock at 13.88. It was a gamble, but one I was comfortable 
with. I placed a stop at 14.25, just above A.” 

She snapped her fingers, “Bingo! Two days later the stock plummeted 
to the other side of the pattern,” touching the bottom trendline at point B. 
“Usually my trades aren’t that easy. I lowered my stop to 15 cents above C [the 
nearest minor high], and waited.” 

The stock bounced off the lower trendline instead of busting through as 
she hoped. She decided to be patient and see what the stock did next. With her 
stop-loss order in place at the breakeven price, she felt protected and comfort- 
able letting the trade ride. 


Sample Trade 113 


A partial rise formed before meeting resistance and heading back down. 
“I believed that when the stock reached the bottom trendline, it would break 
out downward this time, so I doubled my position.” 

She sighed. “I was wrong.” 

“Tt takes a big man to admit that,” I said and winked at her. The stock 
continued down one more day before easing higher. 

“T adjusted my stop-loss order to include the additional shares, but kept it 
at the same price [13.75, C]. Then I waited.” 

The stock reached a minor high of 13.13 before heading down again. 
This time the decline was strong enough to punch through support at the 
lower trendline. 

“When the stock dropped below point B toward the end of May, I low- 
ered my stop to 15 cents above B,” or 12.15. 

She looked at the measure rule for the price target. She calculated a target 
of 9.88 and wondered if the stock would really reach that price. To be safe, she 
decided to cash out if the stock reached 10.15, or 15 cents above the common 
support price of 10 (a whole number typically shows support and resistance). 

“The stock hit 10.38 on high volume. I thought it might be a one-day 
reversal.” With those chart patterns, it’s difficult to be sure if price would 
reverse or not. “I decided to hold on and kept my original target in place.” 

She pointed at the screen, “Two days later, the stock zipped higher 
and tagged my stop. I made only 9% and moved the profit into our emer- 
gency fund.” 

She looked at her watch and gasped. “There’s a shoe store having a liqui- 
dation sale in twenty minutes. They sell Jimmy Choos. I have to go.” She raced 
out of the room. 


9 


Broadening Formation, 
Right-Angled 
and Ascending 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A chart pattern with a horizontal (or near-horizontal) bottom and 
up-sloping top. 


Upward Breakouts 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish continuation 
Performance rank 18 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 15% 
Average rise 43% 
Volume trend Upward 
‘Throwbacks 68% 
Percentage meeting price target 67% 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish reversal 
Performance rank 25 out of 36 

Breakeven failure rate 28% 

Average drop 14% 

Volume trend Upward 

Pullbacks 63% 

Percentage meeting price target 40% 


114 


Tour 115 


Before I began studying this chart pattern, I assumed price would climb 
away from it, simply because the word ascending was in the title. However, I 
believe the title refers to how the top of the pattern sees price trending upward, 
bouncing off a flat base. 

The pattern is a mid-list performer, based on the rank. Even the breakeven 
failure rates are mid-list (not shown in the above Results Snapshot). They are 
within a point of the performance rank. Volume trends upward in the pattern, 
and I find that unusual when compared to other chart pattern types. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks happen about twice in every three trades, 
so don’t be fooled if the stock returns to the breakout price within a 
week or so. 

The percentage meeting the price target, at 67% for upward breakouts, 
is much higher than the 40% rate for downward breakouts, but that’s typical. 
A downward breakout is fighting against a rising general market, so you’d 
expect the stock to drown. 

Let’s take a tour to see what this pattern looks like. 


Tour 
Figure 9.1 puts the formation in perspective. There are two right-angled 


broadening patterns shown in the chart. The left one is somewhat ill-formed 
but better performing than the right. Both chart patterns have a base outlined 


Edwards, A. G. Inc (Securities Brokerage, NYSE, AGE) Ps 


| re 


1 
\ i a 


hia hi 


M : 


a os 
ri adil ly if -16 


hal | 
Lt iy 45 


Apr 92 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 9.1 Two right-angled ascending broadening formations bounded by a 
horizontal base and up-sloping trendline. Price declines after a downward breakout. 


116 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 


by a horizontal trendline connecting the minor lows. The up-sloping trendline 
skirts the tops of the minor highs. The result is a triangle-appearing pattern 
with prices that broaden out. Both of these patterns have downward breakouts, 
but the breakout could have been upward, too. In fact, upward breakouts are 
favored (slightly). 

Why do right-angled ascending broadening formations form? Consider 
Figure 9.2. The rise began in mid-December 1991 on volume that was higher 
than anything seen in the stock for almost 2 months. By late February, the 
stock had reached a new high and was rounding over after meeting selling 
resistance at 14. The stock returned to 12.25 where it found support. At that 
point, it paused for about 2 weeks and established the base on which a trader 
could start to draw a horizontal trendline. 

The reason for the horizontal trendline is one of perceived value. As the 
stock approached the $12 level, more investors and institutional holders pur- 
chased the stock. The desire to own the stock at what they believed a good 
value outweighed the reluctance of sellers to part with their shares. The buy- 
ing demand halted the decline in the stock and eventually sent price skyward 
again. This happened in mid-April as volume spiked along with price. The 
buying enthusiasm caused the stock to reach a new high. 

Momentum was high enough so that the next day, price rose even further 
before closing lower. With the second peak, a tentative trendline drawn along 
the tops of the formation sloped upward and gave character to the broadening 
formation. 

The stock moved rapidly back down even as volume increased. This 
decline stopped before it reached the lower trendline, signaling continued 


Baker J. Inc (Shoe, NASDAQ, JBAK) 


| 


lv i" 


Partial Rise 


Pullback 


ie 

' Te a 
| | -10 

Th all H 

nk 


il 


a 
\ 


hy 
f lr Mala | 
| 
| 


Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 9.2 Price pulls back to the base of the formation. Pullbacks occur often 
in ascending broadening formations. 


Identification Guidelines 117 


buying pressure. Price pushed higher and reached a new high, this one at 
15.50 on 6 May. The up-sloping trendline resistance area repelled any further 
advance (or so I like to think). The stock simply did not have enough upward 
momentum to push through the selling pressure at the new level. 

The next day volume dried up, but there was enough momentum remain- 
ing for another try at the summit. When the attempt failed, the smart money 
headed back to base camp and volume receded further. As price collapsed, other 
investors joined in the retreat and volume moved up. In less than 2 weeks, price 
was back at the lower trendline. 

Another feeble attempt at a new high floundered on unremarkable vol- 
ume. The stock moved horizontally and stalled out—a partial rise that often 
spells trouble for bulls. On 4 June, price dropped on high volume and returned 
to the horizontal trendline. The stock paused there for just over a week before 
moving down and punching through the support level at 12.25. 

A pullback in bull markets is quite common for ascending broadening 
formations, so it is no surprise that after a rapid 13% retreat, the stock turned 
around and pulled back to the base of the pattern. Although not shown in the 
figure, the stock continued moving upward until it began forming another 
ascending broadening pattern in late October with a base at 16.50. 

The ascending broadening formation represents the desire of investors 
and traders to own the stock at a fixed price, in this case about 12.25. Their 
buying enthusiasm pushes price higher until mounting selling pressure causes 
a halt to the rise and sends the stock tumbling. With each attempt, fewer peo- 
ple are left willing to sell their shares until they receive an even higher price, 
so a broadening range of prices appears at the top. 

Eventually, the buying enthusiasm at the base of the pattern collapses 
and removes the support for the stock. A downward breakout occurs when 
the stock punches through the support level and declines. It continues moving 
down until reaching a point where other investors perceive significant value 
and buy the stock. 

Upward breakouts see price continue the fight with the bulls overwhelm- 
ing the bears. Sometimes, the stock will bump up against overhead resistance 
set up by extending the top trendline from the broadening pattern. It’s as if the 
bulls know there’s a turn coming (at the extended trendline), so they back off 
and let selling pressure take the stock down again. 


Identification Guidelines 


How do you find an ascending broadening formation? To answer the question, 
read the selection guidelines outlined in Table 9.1. Microscopes or telescopes 
are optional. While chewing on the table, look at Figure 9.3, an ascending 
broadening formation on the weekly scale. 


118 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 


Characteristic 


Table 9.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


Appearance 


Horizontal bottom 
support line 


Up-sloping 
top trendline 


Touches 

Whitespace 

Price action 
before breakout 


Breakout direction 


Volume 


Looks like a megaphone with the base of the formation horizon- 
tal and bounded on the top by an up-sloping trendline. 


A horizontal, or nearly so, trendline that connects the 
minor lows. 


An up-sloping trendline bounds the expanding price 
series on top. 


Look for at least five trendline touches, three on one trendline 
and two on the other. 


Price should bounce from trendline to trendline, overwriting 
whitespace from the pattern. 


Price sometimes moves horizontally for many months before 
moving outside the formation high or low. 


Price can break out of the pattern in either direction, but favors 
an upward breakout. 


Trends upward most often. 


Support and resistance Follows the two trendlines into the future. 


Parker Drilling Co (Oilfield Svcs/Equipment, NYSE, PKD) 


Minor Highs 


hy, 


y rit 


Ne" 


Trend Line 
Resistance 


| 
ly 


4 | } haa 
WT aya 


Support 


Minor a 


-3 
92 FMAMJ]AS OND 93 FMAM ] J ASOND94FM AM J JA S OND95 FMAM J 


Figure 9.3. Support and resistance areas on a weekly time scale. They appear 
along the trendline axis and can extend far into the future, as in this case. 


Appearance. The overall shape of the formation looks like a megaphone 
with the bottom of it horizontal. 

Horizontal bottom support line. The bottom of the pattern follows 
a horizontal trendline while an up-sloping trendline bounds the top. Look 


Focus on Failures 119 


for price to come close to or touch the trendline at least twice in distinct 
minor lows. 

Up-sloping top trendline. Price should touch the top trendline at least 
twice, in two minor highs. 

Touches. Price should come near to or touch each trendline in minor 
highs or minor lows. At least five touches are needed to qualify the pattern, 
but be flexible. Don’t count it as a touch when price slices through a trendline. 
That often occurs at the start and breakout from the pattern. If price doesn’t 
touch a trendline at a minor high or minor low, then it doesn’t count as a touch. 

Whitespace. Price should bounce across the pattern from top to bottom 
frequently, filling the whitespace with price movement. 

Price action before breakout. In some ascending broadening forma- 
tions, price moves sideways for many months while trying to decide on a 
breakout direction. Eventually, price rises above the formation top or slides 
through the bottom trendline and stages a breakout. 

Breakout direction. The breakout favors an upward direction, but 
it’s almost random. A breakout occurs when price closes outside the trend- 
line boundary. 

Volume. The volume trend is usually upward. Don’t discard a chart pat- 
tern because volume trends in a direction different from what you expect. 

Support and resistance. I chose Figure 9.3 because it shows the two 
common areas of support and resistance. These areas follow the trendlines. 
Along the base of the formation projected into the future, the support area 
repels the decline over 2 years after the formation ends. The rising trendline 
tells a similar tale; it repels price three times nearly a year later. 

The implications of this observation are profound. If you own a stock 
and it is breaking out to new highs, it would be nice to predict how high price 
may rise. One way to do that is to search for formations such as this one. Many 
times, extending the trendlines into the future will predict areas of support and 
resistance. 

Although the trendline did not predict the absolute high, it did suggest 
when price would stall. The resistance area turned out to be a good opportu- 
nity to sell the stock. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 9.4 shows a failure that’s typical for most chart patterns: It’s called a 
5% failure. 

Price bounces between the two trendlines plenty of times, forming a 
right-angled and ascending broadening formation, A. Price along the bottom 
sometimes pierces the horizontal support line (B) and sometimes it falls short. 
It’s close enough, though, to give us enough minor low touches. 


120 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 


ConAgra Brands Inc (CAG) 


19 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 20 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 9.4 The broadening formation breaks out downward, but the stock fails 
to see price drop far. 


Depending on how you draw the horizontal line along the bottom of the 
chart pattern, the breakout happens at C when the stock closes below the line. 

Price makes a lower low before recovering. It’s like dipping your toe into 
water (just after the breakout), finding it too cold for a swim, and scurrying 
back indoors (when price rises). Price busts the downward breakout at D when 
a breakaway gap sends price soaring. 

Unfortunately, these types of failures happen too often in chart patterns. 
If you own the stock and it fails to drop more than 5%, then you’re in good 
shape. If you sell a long holding expecting a big decline and it fails to provide 
one, you might be upset. Chill out. You’ll never get out of this life alive. 

I don’t know of many tips to share that limit these types of failures. One 
tip is to look at the market trend. If the general market is trending higher, that’s 
a plus. If it’s moving sideways, I can live with that, too, but know the ride might 
be bumpy. A downward trend spells trouble. Do I really want to swim against 
the current and risk being run over by a jet skier? 

I do the same check for stocks in the industry. I count how many are ris- 
ing over the past 6 months. If I follow a dozen stocks in the industry and nine 
of them are rising, then that’s good. Too many trending lower could spell a 
problem for a bullish trade. 

Finally, after checking the general market and checking the industry 
health, I’ll look at the stock. On the weekly or monthly scale, if the stock has 
been trending lower for years, then I won’t buy it. If it’s been making new 
highs, trending upward in a nice 30- to 45-degree slope, then I feel reassured 
that the uptrend will continue. That’s a momentum play. 

Ask yourself this: How long will the uptrend continue? Is buying now 
closer to the start of the trend or the end? Of course, we won’t know for sure 


Statistics 121 


until much later, but I want to avoid uptrends that end just after I buy. When 
that happens, it really pisses me off. 

On a shorter-term scale, look for overhead resistance and underlying 
support to help gauge where the stock might reverse. 


Statistics 


Table 9.2 shows general statistics for this chart pattern. 

Number of formations. I found 1,223 patterns in stock data from July 
1991 to October 2019 in 703 stocks. However, after slicing-and-dicing the 
bear market samples, there were too few to present here. So the following 
tables only show bull market statistics. Not all stocks covered the entire range, 
and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Because the inbound price 
trend can come from any direction, we can’t claim this pattern is a bottom ora 
top. But we can compare the inbound trend with the direction after the break- 
out. If the two are in the same direction, then the pattern acts as a continuation 
of the prevailing price trend. 

If price enters the pattern from the top and exits out the top, that’s a 
reversal. The same can be said if price enters from the bottom and breaks out 
downward (it’s also a reversal). 

Upward breakouts act as continuations most often, so we know the 
inbound price trend must have been upward, too. Downward breakouts 
act more often as reversals (suggesting price was trending upward into the 
pattern). 

Reversal/continuation performance. Reversals for both breakout 
directions show better performance than continuations. 

Average rise or decline. The average rise or decline isn’t exceptional. 
As I mentioned, this pattern is a mid-list performer, so don’t expect a stand- 
ing ovation. 


Table 9.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 551 455 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 25% R, 75% C 76% R, 24% C 
Reversal/continuation performance 47% R, 41% C -15% R, -14% C 
Average rise or decline 43% -14% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 12% -2% 
Days to ultimate high or low 243 51 


How many change trend? 55% 25% 


122 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The performance of the chart pattern 
beats the tar out of the index. I can’t think of any pattern that failed to beat 
the general market results. That suggests the measure favors the chart pattern. 

The chart pattern is performing at its best, from the breakout to the ulti- 
mate high or low. But the index, using the same dates, may fall well short of 
what it’s capable of. However, the numbers also show how the general market 
assists individual stocks to perform. The market rises during upward breakouts 
and falls during downward ones. 

Days to ultimate high or low. How long will your trade last? It lasts as 
long as you do not close out your position. However, I measured the average 
hold time from the breakout to the ultimate high or low. 

Pop quiz: If it takes 243 days for price to rise 43% after an upward break- 
out, how long should it take price to drop 14% after a downward breakout, 
assuming the same velocity? Answer: 79 days. However, the table shows that it 
completes the trip in just 51 days. Thus, price drops much faster after a down- 
ward breakout than it rises in an uptrend. Often, price drops twice as fast. 

How many change trend? In a gauge of how well price moves more 
than 20% from the breakout, this pattern does well. However, it’s still a mid- 
list performer. Have I mentioned that? 

Table 9.3 shows failure rates for the broadening pattern. For example, I 
found that 15% of the patterns with upward breakouts failed to see price rise 
more than 5% after the breakout. Downward breakouts failed almost twice as 
often. Yuck. 

Notice as you scan down the list how failure rates increase. Half of all 
upward breakouts will see price fail to rise 25%. Downward breakouts see half 
the patterns failing to rise more than 10%. 

If you want to average 50% on your trades, 72% of them will fail to meet 
the threshold after an upward breakout. And that’s if you trade it often and 
perfectly. You could make more or less, depending on your skill and the situa- 
tion (such as just after a bear market ends when even the losers are winning). 
Sprinkle in some losing trades and your winners will have to make even more 
to reach your 50% target. 

Table 9.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction is almost random with a 
slight advantage going to upward breakouts. 

Yearly position, performance. I sorted the breakout price into the 
yearly high-low range and mapped performance on top of it. The table shows 
that breakouts occurring near the yearly low do better than those near the 
yearly high. It suggests this chart pattern does well with bottom-fishing strat- 
egies (buy low, sell high). Avoid momentum trading this pattern (buy high, 
sell higher). 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about 
two-thirds of the time. Price leaves the pattern for 6 days until it reaches the 
apex, either rising or falling 6% during the journey (depending on the breakout 


Table 9.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) 


Up Breakout 


Statistics 123 


Down Breakout 


5 (breakeven) 
10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

50 

75 

Over 75 


83 or 15% 
71 or 28% 
62 or 39% 
32 or 45% 
40 or 52% 
30 or 58% 
24 or 62% 
56 or 72% 
52 or 82% 
101 or 100% 


Table 9.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Up Breakout 


129 or 28% 
106 or 52% 
62 or 65% 
44 or 75% 
28 or 81% 
22 or 86% 
19 or 90% 
35 or 98% 
10 or 100% 
0 or 100% 


Down Breakout 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 
Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 
Average time to throwback/pullback ends 


Average rise/decline for patterns with 
throwbacks/pullbacks 


Average rise/decline for patterns without 
throwbacks/pullbacks 


Percentage price resumes trend 


Performance with breakout day gap 
Performance without breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


55% up 
L 58%, 
M 43%, H 40% 


68% 

6% in 6 days 
12 days 
39% 


50% 


72% 


48% 
42% 
$0.50 


45% down 
L-17%, 
M -14%, H -12% 


63% 

-6% in 6 days 
12 days 
-13% 


-16% 
48% 


-16% 
14% 
$0.40 


direction), and the stock returns to the breakout in another 6 days, for a 12-day 


roundtrip. 


Notice that performance improves if a throwback or pullback does 


not occur. 


After a throwback or pullback completes, we see that price resumes trend- 
ing upward after an upward breakout but struggles to drop after a downward 


124 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 


breakout. Be careful shorting this pattern after a downward breakout. A pull- 
back may see price drop as far as it’s going to. 

Gaps. Regardless of the breakout direction, a breakout day gap helps 
performance. That’s good news. Why? Because I measured performance from 
the opening price the day after a gap to the ultimate high or low. Thus, you 
can buy into the situation after you see a gap and participate in the better- 
performance party. 

Table 9.5 shows size-related statistics. 

Height. For both breakout directions, broadening patterns taller than 
the median height performed better than did their shorter counterparts. 

‘To use this finding, measure the height of the pattern from top to bottom 
and divide by the breakout price. If the result is higher than the median listed 
in the table for the associated breakout direction, then the pattern is tall. 

Width. Wide patterns performed better than narrow ones. Take the dif- 
ference between the end date and start date of the pattern and compare it to 
the median width in the table. Wide patterns will exceed the median. 

Height and width combinations. ‘Tall and wide patterns outperform 
all other combinations. As a general rule for this pattern, avoid tall and nar- 
row patterns with upward breakouts and avoid short and narrow patterns with 
downward breakouts. 

Table 9.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression to determine the volume trend. 
I found that it trends upward in almost two of every three patterns. 

Rising/Falling volume. Upward breakouts don’t show a big perfor- 
mance difference between volume trending upward or downward. Downward 
breakouts tend to prefer falling volume for better performance. 


Table 9.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 45% -17% 
Short pattern performance 40% -12% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 10.6% 11.4% 
Narrow pattern performance 40% -13% 
Wide pattern performance 46% -16% 
Median width 50 days 48 days 
Short and narrow performance 40% -11% 
Short and wide performance 40% -14% 
Tall and wide performance 48% -17% 


Tall and narrow performance 39% -16% 


Statistics 125 


Table 9.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 63% upward 62% upward 
Rising volume trend performance 42% -13% 
Falling volume trend performance 43% -16% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 44% -15% 
Light breakout volume performance 39% -12% 

Table 9.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 74% 2% 
Middle 22% 17% 
Pattern bottom 2% 70% 


Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume helped the pattern per- 
form for both breakout directions. That finding matches conventional lore 
where lots of sources claim that a high volume breakout helps. Here’s the proof 
for this chart pattern. However, a survey of the chart patterns says it’s only true 
for upward breakouts, not downward ones. 

Table 9.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the pat- 
tern into thirds and found how often price as it moved from the breakout to 
the ultimate high or low slid into one of the thirds. 

For example, I found that price on the way to the ultimate high (upward 
breakouts) would touch the top of the chart pattern 74% of the time. So a stop 
placed there would trigger too often to be viable. If you moved the stop to the 
bottom of the pattern, price would reach it only 2% of the time, but if it were 
to trigger, you might see a big loss. 

Thus, stop placement, where you have to balance the loss size with how 
often it’ll be triggered, is something traders need to master. 

Table 9.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 2010s, for upward breakouts, showed the 
worst performance for this chart pattern compared to the other two decades. 
For downward breakouts, the 2000s were worst. I excluded the two bear mar- 
kets during that decade, too. 

Failures over time. The most recent decade, the 2010s, showed substan- 
tially higher failure rates than the 1990s. I’m not sure why that is. 

Table 9.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. A quarter to nearly half of broadening patterns 
will bust. That means price moved no more than 10% away from the breakout 
price before reversing and closing beyond the other side of the pattern. 


126 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 


Table 9.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 41% -16% 
2000s 50% -13% 
2010s 36% -14% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 10% 20% 
2000s 13% 34% 
2010s 23% 33% 

Table 9.9 
Busted Patterns 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 146 or 26% 220 or 48% 
Single bust count 77 or 53% 140 or 64% 
Double bust count 45 or 31% 10 or 5% 
Triple+ bust count 24 or 16% 70 or 32% 
Performance for all busted patterns -14% 33% 
Single busted performance -23% 49% 
Non-busted performance -14% 43% 


Busted occurrence. I counted how often price single, double, or triple 
(or more) busted a pattern. See the Glossary for details. Single busts happened 
the most. You might think that triple busts would be rare, but they often come 
in second place (which they do here, but only for downward breakouts). 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared the performance of 
all busted patterns, single busted patterns, and non-busted patterns. I wanted 
to know if busted patterns performed better than non-busted ones. 

The table shows that single busted patterns performed better than the 
other two categories. The problem with a single bust is you don’t know ahead 
of time that a pattern will single bust. 

Non-busted patterns performed better after downward breakouts com- 
pared to all busted patterns. AW busted patterns means it’s the average for the 
three busted types (single, double, and three or more). 


Trading Tactics 


Table 9.10 lists trading tactics. 
Measure rule. The measure rule sets a target price, but it makes no guar- 
antee that price will reach it. 


Trading Tactics 127 


Table 9.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height from highest high to the horizontal 
trendline. For upward breakouts, add the height to the highest high 
in the pattern. For downward breakouts, subtract the height from the 
value of the horizontal trendline. The result is the target price. More 
accurate targets use a formation height divided by 2. The bottom 
portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Partial rise Use a partial rise or decline as an entry signal. A partial rise works 61% 
or decline of the time and a partial decline works 80% of the time in correctly 
predicting the breakout direction. 
Intraform- For tall patterns, buy near the lower trendline and sell near or at the top 
ation trade when price stops rising. 


Stop location Use Table 9.7 for help placing a stop. 
Busted trade Table 9.9 may help you decide to trade a busted pattern. 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 86% 68% 

Percentage reaching full height target 68% 40% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 50% 19% 

Percentage reaching 3x height 37% 9% 


To use the rule, compute the pattern’s height, the difference between the 
highest high and the horizontal trendline in the formation. For upward break- 
outs, add the height to the highest high in the pattern. For downward break- 
outs, subtract the height from the value of the horizontal trendline. The result 
is the target price. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often price reaches the target 
for various heights. For example, if you use the full height, price will reach the 
target between 40% and 68% of the time, on average, if your patterns are like 
the ones I tested. 

For a more conservative target, calculate the height, divide by 2, and then 
apply the result to the pattern’s high or low price. 

Figure 9.5 makes applying the measure rule clearer. The height of the 
formation is the difference between the highest high (34.13) and the bottom 
trendline price (29.25), or 4.88. Subtract the result from the bottom trend- 
line price, giving a target price of 24.37. The nearer target in the figure uses 
half the formation height, or 2.44, to give a price target of 26.81. An upward 
breakout target would be the height added to the top of the pattern, or 34.13 
+ 4.88 = 39.01. 

Partial rise or decline. A partial rise or decline can be difficult to trade 
because price often pauses partway across the chart pattern on its way to the 
opposite side. This pause looks like a partial rise or decline. Wait before buying 


128 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 


to be sure that price is unlikely to continue in the original direction. Try buy- 
ing when price closes beyond the halfway point between the minor low/high 
and the trendline. 

For example, if the top trendline is at 20 and price has declined from 
there to 14 before starting back up in what you suspect is a partial decline, buy 
when the price closes above 17 (that is half the distance between 20 and 14). 
You might use Fibonacci retracements of 38%, 50%, or 62% as buying loca- 
tions, but I don’t think they’ll give you an edge. If price turns at those retrace- 
ment levels, then consider opening a position. 

Intraformation trade. If the pattern is tall enough, consider trading 
between the two trendlines. Buy after price bounces off the lower trendline 
and sell after it turns down at the top. If you are lucky, the pattern will break 
out upward and you can ride the stock even higher. Use trailing stops to pro- 
tect your profits. When the stock climbs above the nearest minor high, raise 
your stop to just below the prior minor /ow. That strategy should give the stock 
plenty of wiggle room, but adapt it to your market conditions. 

Stop location. Table 9.7 gives guidance on how often price will reach 
various parts of the chart pattern on the way to the ultimate high or low. 
Be sure to adjust the stop location for your tolerance to losing your shirt 
(or blouse). 

Busted trade. If you are lucky enough to trade a busted pattern that 
single busts, then that’s terrific. You could make a nice chunk of cabbage. Since 
busts happen between 53% and 64% of the time, the odds are on your side. 

If the stock double busts, then don’t blame me. If the stock triple busts, 
then the whiplash from bouncing from side to side will make you too dizzy to 
blame anyone. 

One advantage to trading a busted pattern is that you know where the 
pattern ends, and so you know what the breakout price is (with some broaden- 
ing patterns, it can be difficult to tell where the pattern ends and the break- 
out price). 

I suggest you trade only downward busted patterns. Buy when the stock 
closes above the top of the pattern and hang on for the ride. 


Experience 
Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Hughes Supply Inc. 


Hughes Supply Inc. (HUG) in the fall of 1999 started forming a broadening 
formation, right-angled and, yes, ascending. Although my notes go back to 
1999, I don’t have any for this trade. So let me wing it. 


Experience 129 


I bought 4 days after the stock touched the lower pattern trendline and 
received a fill at 13 even. When I bought, the stock hadn’t risen much above the 
lower trendline (priced at 12.56), so I bought near the bottom of the pattern. 

Unfortunately, the day I bought the stock peaked and reversed, com- 
pleting a partial rise when the stock touched the lower trendline. The partial 
rise correctly predicted a downward breakout, and the stock continued lower. 
I sold my small position, received a fill at 12.34, and got my hand slapped for 
a loss of 5%. 

I was late entering the trade, but I wanted to be sure price was mov- 
ing higher, away from the bottom trendline when I bought. That sounds like 
an excuse, but knowing if price will turn at the trendline seemed like a wise 
choice. I only gave up 44 cents of profit by waiting. 

I don’t know if I had a stop in place to cash me out, and I’m unwilling to 
dig up my confirmation records to check. However, it’s close enough to the 
12.56 trendline that yes, I probably did use a stop to exit. 

So the entry was late but justifiable, and the exit was perfect. I don’t have 
a lesson to share. I traded this well and kept the loss small. 


XL Group 


In September 2009, XL Group (XL) started forming a right-angled and 
ascending broadening pattern. It was a long one, lasting until June 2010. The 
stock made a partial rise, but that failed to see price break out downward. That 
didn’t bother me because I trade from the bullish side. 

I hid in the bushes and waited for the upward breakout. The breakout 
happened on 15 September 2010, just over a year after the pattern began. 
I bought 5 days later and received a fill at the market open of 20.99. The break- 
out price was 20.28 (the opening price the day after the breakout), so I bought 
near the optimum entry price. 

What was my stop price? None. Why? Because this was a long-term 
holding. I noted that the downside was 15.66, the bottom (start) of the broad- 
ening pattern. If the stock dropped that far, it would hand me a (potential) loss 
of 25% (however, the lowest the stock dropped was 17.69, about a year after 
I bought). The potential loss was well above the usual 8% or less I like to see, 
but this wasn’t a trade, but an investment. I made allowances. 

Upside targets were 28, 56, and 69. I also made mention in my trading note- 
book about this stock breaking out of congestion. It was a small knot, about a week 
long of sideways price movement. I seemed excited about that for some reason. 

Indicators? Sure. Why not? Wilder RSI was overbought. Commodity 
channel index said sell 5 days ago (the day price broke out upward, which was a 
bad call). Bollinger bands were following volatility higher. It suggested waiting 
for a throwback that didn’t happen (and a missing throwback suggests better 
performance, of course, from Table 9.4). 


130 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Ascending 


My computer informed me that volume was not rising consistently over 
the past 3 weeks, and warned of a higher failure rate for the trade because of 
it. Hmm. However, it patted me on the back about picking a stock with a rising 
relative strength against the S&P 500 index (that is, the stock was outperform- 
ing the general market). 

Here’s my notebook: “Buy reason: congestion breakout with high long- 
term potential. Risk 25% versus >100% reward. Could be exposed to hur- 
ricane losses if any storms brush [the] east coast. Its reinsurance business 
could get nailed, [caused by] hurricane losses. Placed a market order to buy 
at the open since the daily swing is all of 70 cents. Big deal. Bid/ask spread 
suggests an open higher by 3 cents, but we’ll see. Futures at +6.50, so mildly 
higher open.” 

Nothing really exciting there except for the potential to double my 
money. All I had to do was hold on long enough for that to happen. 

Fast forward to 2018. Along the way, the stock dropped from peak to val- 
ley 30%, 25%, and 28%, in that order, but the stock always recovered. This 
was a buy-and-hold situation, and I was looking to make the big bucks, a dou- 
bling of my money. 

On March 5, the company announced that it would be taken over by 
another company. The news upset me. Why? Because I felt they were buying the 
stock on the cheap. On the weekly chart, this was a cloudbank play, with the base 
of the cloud at 56 and the top of the cloud at 82. Their offer took me out of the 
stock at 57.60, below where the stock had once traded (at 82). Recall, my upward 
target was 69 and they were cashing me out just above my middle target, 56. 

I made 198% on the trade, including dividends. I almost tripled my 
money, but it took 8 years to do it. In terms of dollar profit, this was my second 
most profitable trade (but well down the list in percentage terms), so I put a 
lot of cash behind it. 


¢ Lesson: Good things can happen to people who wait. 
¢ Lesson: For a buy-and-hold investment, you have to be able to tolerate 
large price swings. 


Sample Trade 


Palmer sat at his computer desk. His foot hammered the carpet, and his fingers 
drummed the desk. It looked as if he swallowed too much caffeine. I am sure 
you have met the type. 

Faced with the situation shown in Figure 9.5, he took swift, decisive, 
maybe even impulsive action. At point A, where the stock touched the top 
trendline, he quickly sold it short and received a fill at 33.38. He placed a stop 
at 34 in case the trade went against him. Then he waited. 

It did not take long for the stock to cross the broadening top and reach 
the horizontal trendline. 


Sample Trade 131 


Wal-Mart Stores Inc (Retail Store, NYSE, WMT) 


Broadening Top 


Wy 3 


wn Naya oe 
| 


1 -— 26 
- 25 

Target Price 
24 


21 
Oct 92 Nov Dec Jan93 Feb Mar = Apr May = Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 9.5 Shown are price targets using half and full formation heights for the 
broadening top formation. 


His fingers stopped moving, and he pointed at the screen. “I should have 
placed an order to cover my short at 29.38. That’s the value of the bottom 
trendline. Look what happened.” 

Price bounced off the low. He covered his short the following day, shown 
as point B, at 30.50. Immediately, he went long and bought the stock at the 
same price. 

Palmer placed a stop-loss order just below the horizontal trendline, at 
29.25, just in case. Then he extended the top trendline. “I worried that the 
stock might not reach it, so I put a target below the old high at A.” 

In less than a week, the stock reached his target and sold at 33.50 (point C). 
Since the stock was still showing an upward bias, he held off trading and waited 
for the trend to reverse. Three days later he sold the stock short again at 33. 
This time, he put a sell order above the lower trendline at 29.50. 

“The stock moved against me. Made me nervous.” 

I wondered what that would look like. He was already twitchy. He couldn’t 
sit still. 

The stock rose to 34 and oscillated up and down for nearly 3 weeks, 
never quite reaching his stop-loss point of 34.38. Then the stock plunged and 
zipped across the chart pattern. It hit his target price at point D, and he cov- 
ered his short. 

Sensing a shift in the investment winds, he went long on the stock at the 
same price but put a stop-loss order below the lower trendline. “The following 
day, I was stopped out at 29.25 and took a small loss.” 

“Then what did you do?” I asked. 

He reached for his coffee mug, found it empty, and left the office for a 
refill. [ never did get an answer to my question. 


10 


Broadening Formation, 
Right-Angled 
and Descending 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: The pattern has a horizontal top with lower lows following a down-sloping 


trendline. 
Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 

Breakeven failure rate 

Average rise 

Volume trend 

‘Throwbacks 

Percentage meeting price target 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 

Breakeven failure rate 

Average drop 

Volume trend 

Pullbacks 

Percentage meeting price target 


132 


i hal hy ine 


Long-term bullish continuation 
19 out of 39 

21% 

43% 

Upward 

64% 

65% 


Short-term bearish reversal 
18 out of 36 

23% 

15% 

Upward 

69% 

51% 


Tour 133 


The right-angled and descending broadening formation’s name is a 
mouthful, but it describes a pattern with a flat top and price following a down- 
sloping trend along the bottom. 

The performance rank places it in the middle of the chart patterns 
I studied. The pattern favors an upward breakout almost twice as often as a 
downward one. 

The above Results Snapshot shows performance about what you would 
expect from a mid-list performer. Nothing appears that would blow the roof off 
the house. Volume trends upward throughout the pattern and that is unusual. 

Let’s take a scenic tour of the pattern. 


Tour 


What do descending broadening patterns look like, and why do they form? 
Figure 10.1 shows an example of the chart pattern I caught back in the 1990s. 
There are the two key ingredients to this broadening pattern. First, price at the 
top of the pattern reaches the same level (or nearly the same) for several weeks. 
A trendline drawn atop the pattern’s peaks forms a horizontal line. 

Second, the minor lows touch and follow a down-sloping trendline as 
price drops. Eventually, price breaks out of the pattern by closing either above 
the top trendline or below the bottom one. 


Applebees (Restaurant, NASDAQ, APPB) a 


A |, - 20 
One-Day Reversal i 1, 
19 


i ny 


mi WA A \ ‘ 


ty | “15 
@ 


| 
| Support Line -13 


| yA 


Jul 94 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar 


Figure 10.1 A horizontal trendline drawn along the tops, and a down-sloping 
trendline connecting the minor lows, is characteristic of this chart pattern. 
The extended, down-sloping trendline shows future support and resistance areas. 
A one-day reversal appears on 3 November when price pushed above the formation 
top on high volume but closed at the low for the day. 


134 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


In this example, the breakout is downward (which happens in mid- 
November, the day when the second down-sloping line begins) because price 
closes below the lower trendline there. I require price to close outside the 
trendline, so that’s why the one-day reversal on 3 November at the pattern’s 
top doesn’t qualify as an upward breakout. On that day, price closed at 19, the 
low for the day, and below the top trendline value of about 19.50. 

Figure 10.2 shows an example of the broadening pattern with an upward 
breakout. The top of the pattern is well formed with several minor peaks 
reaching the same price level. However, two one-day touches compose the 
lower trendline. A trendline touch is a trendline touch regardless of whether 
it is composed of one-day spikes or many days of consecutive touches, but 
they need to be minor lows (or minor highs), which these two are. If price cuts 
through a trendline, such as at the start or end of the pattern, it doesn’t count 
as a trendline touch because it’s not at a minor high or low. 

The figure shows a broadening pattern with an upward breakout provid- 
ing a tasty 10% rise in just over 2 weeks. A throwback to the top of the broad- 
ening pattern occurs almost 4 weeks after the breakout. I consider throwbacks 
or pullbacks that happen later than 30 days to be just normal price action, and 
not a throwback or pullback. This one just makes the cut at 27 days. Often, a 
throwback or pullback will return to the breakout price in an average of 12 days. 

Why do these chart patterns form? Look at Figure 10.3. During 1993, 
the stock entered the left pattern in early April and moved higher on moderate 
volume until it reached about 35. There, investors selling the stock matched 


Valero Energy Corp. (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, VLO) 


-24 


Breakout 


r HT yal, at 


Zi 


Throwback 


-22 


Jun 95 Jul Au Se Oct Nov Dec 
9 p 


Figure 10.2 Another descending broadening formation, but this one has an 
upward breakout. Almost 4 weeks after the breakout, price throws back to the 
formation before ultimately moving higher. 


Tour 135 


Varity Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, VAT) 
ae 


Partial “Tigh 40 


39 

- 38 

-37 

\ — 36 
- 35 

Resistance — 34 


"a Line 


uf i 


Support Zone 


M Wa 


u 


Feb 93 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 10.3 The left descending broadening pattern shows a trendline rebound 
resulting from earlier support. The right formation shows a partial rise that can 
predict a downward breakout. Shown are two resistance areas that follow the pat- 
tern’s trendlines. 


buyers eager to own the security, and the rise stalled. The stock traveled side- 
ways until 10 May when it moved below the prior minor low. As the stock 
approached $31, it entered a support zone set up by the retracement in mid- 
March. The decline stalled and moved sideways for several days. Due to the 
support level, many investors believed that the decline was at an end and the 
stock would move higher. It did. As volume climbed, price gapped up (breaka- 
way gap) and quickly soared back to the old high. 

The stock ran into selling pressure from institutions and others trying to 
sell blocks of shares at a fixed price. The available supply of shares halted the 
advance. Price hung on for a few days, moved a bit lower, and paused before 
beginning a rapid decline to a new minor low. 

As volume climbed, the stock declined until it touched the lower trend- 
line, a region of support. Suspecting an oversold stock, investors bought and 
forced it higher again. When the stock reached the old high, there were fewer 
shares available for purchase. Investors and institutions who were trying to get 
35 a share for their stock sold most of their shares in the preceding months. 
Soaking up the available supply, the stock gapped upward and closed above the 
old high. An upward breakout was at hand. 

The stock moved higher but soon formed another descending broaden- 
ing pattern (the right one, in August). This one was compact and tight but had 
bearish implications. 


136 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


When the stock tried to reach the top trendline but could not, the partial 
rise foretold the coming decline. The stock plunged through the lower trend- 
ing in late September and continued lower. 

If you look at both chart patterns, their stories are nearly the same. There 
is a supply of stock available at a fixed price. After exhausting the supply, price 
either rises above the top trendline or declines below the bottom one. The 
determination on which way price will go is not clear. Sometimes supply over- 
whelms buying demand and the stock declines, unable to recover as the stock 
pierces the lower trendline. At other times, the supply tightens and enthusias- 
tic buyers jump in and push the price higher. 


Identification Guidelines 


Are there some guidelines that can assist in identifying descending broadening 
formations? Yes, and Table 10.1 outlines them. 

Appearance. The shape of the broadening chart pattern looks like a 
megaphone with the top held horizontal. Price climbs until it touches the top 
trendline, and then reverses direction. On the pattern’s bottom, price declines, 


making a series of lower lows, following a trendline downward. 


Characteristic 


Table 10.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


Appearance 


Horizontal top 
resistance line 


Down-sloping 
trendline 


Touches 
Whitespace 
Breakout direction 


Partial rise 
or decline 


Volume 


Support and 
resistance 


Looks like a megaphone, tilted down, with the top of the chart 
pattern horizontal and bounded on the bottom by a down-sloping 
trendline. 


A horizontal line of resistance joins the minor highs, shown by 
drawing a trendline connecting the peaks. 

The expanding price series is bounded on the bottom by a 
down-sloping trendline. 

Look for at least five trendline touches, three on one trendline and 
two on the other. They need not be alternating touches. Price 
slicing through a trendline doesn’t count as a touch. 

Price should bounce from trendline to trendline, erasing most whites- 
pace in the pattern. 

Price can break out in either direction, usually accompanied by a rise 
in volume that soon tapers off. 

For an established pattern, when price climbs toward the top trend- 
line or declines toward the lower one but fails to touch it, price 
often reverses direction and breaks out of the broadening pattern. 

Trends upward most often (but almost random). Don’t discard a pat- 
tern with a downward volume trend. 


Follows the two trendlines into the future but is sporadic. 


Identification Guidelines 137 


Horizontal top resistance line. When two (preferably more) minor 
highs achieve the same, or nearly the same price, you can draw a horizontal 
trendline connecting them, forming the top of the pattern. 

Down-sloping trendline. The same applies to the down-sloping trend- 
line: It requires at least two distinct touches before drawing the trendline 
(more touches are better). 

Touches. I prefer to see at least five trendline touches, three on one trend- 
line and two on the other, with all five being minor highs or minor lows (peaks 
or valleys). Fewer than five touches make correct identification more difficult. 

Whitespace. Figure 10.4 shows an identification problem at AB. There are 
two trendline touches along the top (as minor highs) and four touches as minor 
lows along the bottom. The pattern /ooks like a descending broadening pattern. 

It’s not. 

See that chunk of whitespace at B? Price doesn’t cross the pattern often 
enough to qualify it as a valid broadening pattern. The inset at C shows that 
the pattern is better drawn as a down-sloping channel. This chart is an example 
of cutting off a turn and calling it a descending broadening pattern. Do not tell 
anyone that you found a broadening pattern after you cut off a turn. What you 
found was a mistake. 

Breakout direction. A breakout occurs when price closes outside the 
trendline boundary. Breakouts can occur in either direction. 

Partial rise or decline. A partial rise, as shown in Figure 10.3, ora partial 
decline (not shown), is often a clue to the ultimate breakout direction. When 
price curls around on a partial rise or decline and returns to the trendline, the 
stock will usually break out immediately (that is, without crossing the chart 
pattern again). 


BJ Services (BJS) 


‘ ¥ 


we 
‘1 4, Ps Ls ye 4 
yn 
wi 


96 Feb Mar Apr May — Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan97 Feb Mar Apr May 


4 


3 


Figure 10.4 AB is not a descending broadening formation. 


138 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


Volume. Volume tends to rise over the length of the chart pattern, some- 
times following the price movement. 

Support and resistance. The pattern’s trendlines, when extended into 
the future, can sometimes act as areas of support or resistance. Figures 10.1, 
10.3, and 10.7 show examples. Sometimes the support or resistance level is 
active for months or even years. 


Focus on Failures 


Since descending broadening formations can break out either up or down, 
I show both views of failed breakouts. The first one, Figure 10.5, is charac- 
terized by the telltale partial decline in late November. From there, the stock 
climbs and eventually pierces the top trendline, as predicted. 

Once price closes above the trendline, you would expect it to throw back 
to the formation top and resume the upward trend. In this situation, price 
reverses at 45 and returns to the formation proper—a classic throwback. 
Unfortunately, instead of rebounding and heading higher like a typical throw- 
back, the stock continues down. It does more work inside the chart pattern 
before shooting out the other side in a straight-line run. 

Had you bought this stock after the upward breakout, you would have 
seen the stock decline from a purchase point of about 44.50 to a low of 36.88. 
A stop-loss order placed at the bottom of the chart pattern would have gotten 
you out at 39, still a hefty decline. However, if you’d held onto the stock (not 


Pacific Telesis Group (Telecom. Services, NYSE, PAC) ails 


Breakout Ny Throwback _44 
- 43 


qn 
Wy" y ‘ 


Ho Decline \p i - 39 
l 


Wie 


une e 
r il y ho 
ny i | rif h 


r 


h 
i" \ rh "Vh, 


Jul 9 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr -35 


Figure 10.5 A descending broadening formation appears with price that fails to 
continue moving up. The partial decline suggests the ultimate breakout will be 
upward, but the rise falters and price moves down instead. 


Statistics 139 


Healthcare Compare (Medical Services, NASDAQ, HCCC) 


Jul 94 Au Se Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb 
9g p 


Figure 10.6 This descending broadening pattern (left) results in a 5% failure. 
A broadening top formed in early November. 


recommended, by the way), it would have been rewarding. The low occurred 
on 8 April (not shown), and it turned out to be the lowest price reached dur- 
ing the next 2 years. The stock hit its peak in early November 1993 at a price 
near 60. 

Figure 10.6 shows a more harrowing tale because it involves a short sale. 
Investors watching the sharp 2-day decline beginning 14 October 1994 would 
be tempted to short the stock the next day. Had they done so, or even waited a 
few days, they would have opened the trade near the low. From that point on 
the stock moved higher, back into the formation before ultimately soaring out 
the top. If you were a novice trader and had not placed a stop on your short 
sale, your loss would have taken you from a low of 24.38 to 53, where it peaked 
near the end of the study. 

The figure represents a failure type I call a 5% failure. That happens 
when price breaks out in a given direction and moves no more than 5% before 
crossing the pattern and breaking out in the new direction. This type of failure 
can turn a small profit into a large loss if stops are not used. 


Statistics 


Table 10.2 shows general statistics for right-angled and descending broaden- 
ing formations. 

Number found. I found 1,150 patterns in 668 stocks from August 1991 
to October 2019. However, that included bear market patterns, and there were 
not enough of those to include in the statistics. Not all of the stocks covered 


140 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


Table 10.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 601 335 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 38% R, 62% C 58% R, 42% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 45% R, 41% C -14% R, -17% C 
Average rise or decline 43% -15% 
Standard & Poor's 500 change 12% -2% 
Days to ultimate high or low 244 51 
How many change trend? 54% 27% 


the entire period, and some no longer trade. Notice that the pattern favors 
upward breakouts, judging only by the numbers. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Upward breakouts act as 
continuation patterns most often, but downward breakouts act as reversals. 
Recall that a reversal has price leaving the chart pattern in a direction opposite 
the way it entered. Continuation patterns have price exit in the same direction 
as the prevailing price trend. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Upward breakouts show bet- 
ter performance from reversal patterns, but downward breakouts favor 
continuations. 

Average rise or decline. Shown in the table is the average rise or decline. 
Nothing spectacular here. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. I compared the date of the breakout to 
the ultimate high or low posted by the chart pattern and compared those to 
the index. The index shows it didn’t perform nearly as well as the broadening 
pattern over the same holding period. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Upward breakouts take an average of 
about 8 months to reach the ultimate high, but downward breakouts end faster, 
in about 2 months. The yardage traveled is different, though, because upward 
breakouts rise 43% and downward breakouts drop 15%. If you do the math, 
we find that the downward breakout should have reached bottom in 85 days, 
not 51. So, price dropped faster than it climbed. 

How many change trend? I added this measure to help decide which 
chart patterns lead to outsized gains (a gain or loss of more than 20%). The 
results shown in the table are mid-list numbers. The upward breakout number 
is good (more than half the patterns see decent gains), but downward break- 
outs fall well short of a 20% loss Gust 27% drop that far). 

Table 10.3 shows various failure rates for the two breakout directions. 
How do you make sense of the table? It is easier to understand by example. 
I found that 21% of the patterns with upward breakouts failed to see price rise 


Table 10.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) 


Up Breakout 


Statistics 141 


Down Breakout 


5 (breakeven) 
10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

50 

75 

Over 75 


125 or 21% 
65 or 32% 
46 or 39% 
43 or 46% 
29 or 51% 
44 or 59% 
28 or 63% 
65 or 74% 
55 or 83% 
101 or 100% 


Table 10.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Up Breakout 


77 or 23% 
72 or 33% 
50 or 59% 
45 or 73% 
29 or 81% 
21 or 88% 
15 or 92% 
17 or 97% 
9 or 100% 
0 or 100% 


Down Breakout 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 
Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 
Average time to throwback/pullback ends 


Average rise/decline for patterns with 
throwbacks/pullbacks 


Average rise/decline for patterns without 
throwbacks/pullbacks 


Percentage price resumes trend 


Performance with breakout day gap 
Performance without breakout day gap 
Average gap size 


64% up 
L 46%, M 
49%, H 41% 


64% 

5% in 6 days 
12 days 
43% 


42% 


71% 


35% 
44% 
$0.45 


36% down 
L-19%, M 
-14%, H-12% 


69% 

-7% in 6 days 
12 days 
-15% 


-15% 
55% 


-18% 
-15% 
$0.37 


more than 5%. Over half (51%) of the patterns failed to see price rise more 


than 25% after an upward breakout. 


You read downward breakouts in a similar manner. Almost a quarter of 
the patterns (23%) saw price drop no more than 5%. Half (59%) didn’t see 


price drop more than 15%. 


Table 10.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 


142 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


Breakout direction. Price breaks out of the pattern upward almost twice 
as often as downward. 

Yearly position, performance. I sorted the breakout price into one of 
three buckets, each a third of the yearly high-low range. Then I checked per- 
formance for patterns in those three buckets. The table shows that there’s not a 
big performance difference for upward breakouts. Clearly, though, you’ll want 
to avoid trading patterns within a third of the yearly high (price rises 41%). 

Downward breakouts also show those near the yearly high underperform- 
ing those in the other two buckets. It suggests people should avoid momentum 
trading this chart pattern and focus on bottom fishing for candidates. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur almost 
two-thirds of the time, and it takes stocks less than 2 weeks to return to the 
breakout price. 

I didn’t see any significant performance difference for patterns with and 
without throwbacks or pullbacks. With other chart patterns, if a throwback or 
pullback occurs, performance suffers (on average). 

Price resumes the upward move 71% of the time (which is quite good) and 
the downtrend 55% of the time (which needs improvement, but it’s not bad). 

Gaps. Most of the time (for other chart patterns), breakout day gaps 
help performance but we see that behavior in this pattern only after a down- 
ward breakout. 

The rumors you’ve heard are true: Table 10.5 shows size-related statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform substantially better than short ones. How 
do you use this result? Compute the pattern’s height from the price of the top 
trendline to the last touch of the lower trendline (the lowest low in the pattern). 
Divide the difference by the breakout price. If the result is above the median 


Table 10.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 46% -18% 
Short pattern performance 39% -13% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 9.7% 10.4% 
Narrow pattern performance 41% -15% 
Wide pattern performance 45% -16% 
Median width 50 days 42 days 
Short and narrow performance 40% -13% 
Short and wide performance 37% -10% 
Tall and wide performance 48% -18% 


Tall and narrow performance 43% -18% 


Statistics 143 


shown in the table, then you have a tall pattern; below the median means it 
is a short one. Invest only in tall patterns unless you feel confident of your 
assessment. 

Width. Wide patterns outperform narrow ones but not by an amount 
worth telling Mom about. I used the median length to separate narrow pat- 
terns from wide ones. 

Height and width combinations. The worst performance comes from 
patterns that are both short and wide. You will want to avoid those. The best 
performance happens for patterns both tall and wide. The performance differ- 
ences are large enough that you should pay attention to them when contem- 
plating a trade. 

Table 10.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends upward most often, but the direction is 
near random. 

Rising/Falling volume. Broadening patterns with rising volume trend 
show better performance after the breakout than when volume recedes (as 
measured from the start to the end of the pattern). 

Breakout volume. Technical analysts seem to place a lot of emphasis 
on heavy breakout volume, but as the table shows, the results I found are not 
statistically significant (for heavy or light breakout volume versus performance). 

Table 10.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the 
pattern in half (I sedated it ahead of time) and checked how often price 
returned to the various parts on the journey from the breakout to the ultimate 
high or low. 


Table 10.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 58% up 53% up 
Rising volume trend performance 45% -16% 
Falling volume trend performance 39% -14% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 43% -15% 
Light breakout volume performance 42% -16% 

Table 10.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 78% 2% 
Middle 26% 17% 


Pattern bottom 5% 74% 


144 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


For example, broadening patterns with upward breakouts saw price return 
to the top of the pattern 78% of the time. It suggests you don’t want to place a 
stop-loss order there. If you stick the stop order at the bottom of the pattern, 
it'll avoid being hit 95% of the time, but the resulting loss may be higher than 
you can tolerate. So do check both the position of the stop and the size of the 
loss should the stop trigger. A volatility stop may be just what you’re looking 
for. ’ve hidden some in the Glossary (see “Volatility stop”). 

Table 10.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. For upward breakouts, the 2000s posted stellar 
gains. Downward breakouts suffered during the same time (and that makes 
intuitive sense). 

Failures over time. Failures (failure of price to rise or fall more than 5% 
after the breakout) after upward breakouts happened most often in the 2010s, 
and downward breakouts also show a lot of failures in that decade, but the 
2000s edged them out. There were two bear markets during the 2000s, but I 
used a coffee filter to remove them from the statistics. 

Table 10.9 shows statistics for busted patterns. 


Table 10.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 35% -16% 
2000s 53% -13% 
2010s 35% -17% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 19% 17% 
2000s 19% 27% 
2010s 25% 25% 
Table 10.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 175 or 29% 144 or 43% 
Single bust count 85 or 49% 100 or 69% 
Double bust count 54 or 31% 5 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 36 or 21% 39 or 27% 
Performance for all busted patterns -13% 43% 
Single busted performance -22% 60% 


Non-busted performance -15% 43% 


Trading Tactics 145 


Busted patterns count. I’m always surprised at how many patterns fail 
to move more than 10% away from the pattern, then reverse and shoot out the 
other side of the pattern. Here, we have over a quarter (29%) to nearly half 
(43%) bust the up or down breakout, respectively. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the number of busts into one, two, or more 
than two busts (triple+). Single busts happen most often. Notice that triple+ 
busts place second after a downward breakout. I’ve seen this in other pat- 
terns, too. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Look at the performance after a 
single busted downward breakout: Broadening patterns see price rise an aver- 
age of 60%. When I read that, my jaw swung open, my dentures fell out, and 
I had to pick them up off the carpet. Single busts also outperformed after a 
busted upward breakout. 

The 60% number is so startling that if you can find a busted downward 
breakout, then do consider trading the pattern. 

Non-busted patterns seem to have the edge (and it’s slight) on perfor- 
mance if you disregard the single busted patterns and downward breakouts. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 10.10 outlines trading tactics for descending broadening formations. 

Measure rule. Figure 10.7 illustrates the use of the measure rule. Com- 
pute the broadening pattern’s height by first taking the difference between the 
highest high (A, 49.50) and the lowest low (B, 43.50). Add the result (6) to the 
value of the horizontal trendline to get a target price of 55.50 (for an upward 
breakout). Price reaches this target during mid-March 1996 as the stock climbs 
on its way to 60. 

If the stock breaks out downward, the measure rule computation is nearly 
the same. Subtract the pattern’s height from the lowest low, giving a target 
price of 37.50. Be aware that upward breakouts in bull markets are more likely 
to reach their targets (65%) than other combinations. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often price will reach the 
target based on various heights. For example, if you slice the height of the 
pattern in half and use that in the measure rule computation, you'll find price 
will reach the target 82% of the time if your pattern behaves like the average 
pattern. 

Once you’ve computed a target, change the difference between the tar- 
get and the current price into a percentage of the current price. Then use 
Table 10.3 to see how often the stock will fail to exceed the move. 

Using our example, the target is 6 points away from the top of the pat- 
tern (49.50, which we assume is the current price), or 12% above A (or 100 
x 6/49.50). Table 10.3 shows that 32% will fail to see price rise more than 
10%, so the failure rate would be higher for a 12% target. That also means 


146 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


Table 10.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height by taking the difference between 
the horizontal top and the lowest low in the pattern. For upward 
breakouts, add the height to the value of the horizontal trendline. 
For downward breakouts, subtract the height from the lowest low in 
the pattern. The result is the target price. The bottom portion of this 
table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Wait for breakout It is unclear which way price will break out (upward breakouts happen 
most often), so it is best to wait for price to close outside the trend- 
lines. Once they do, expect price to continue moving in the direction 
of the breakout. 


Stop location Once a breakout occurs, consider the opposite side of the formation as 
the stop-loss point. However, in many cases you will want something 
closer to your purchase price, so look for nearer support or resistance 
zones or use a volatility stop. 


Intraforma- For aggressive and experienced traders, consider placing a trade as 
tion trading price reverses course at the pattern’s lower trendline boundary. Go 
long at the bottom (which hopes for an upward breakout), but be 
sure to use stops. 


Partial decline Short a stock if you see a partial decline once price curls around and 
begins heading back up. A partial decline correctly predicts an 
upward breakout 75% of the time. 


Busted trade If you see a busted downward breakout, then consider buying the 
stock. See Table 10.9 for details. 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 82% 76% 
Percentage reaching full height target 65% 51% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 49% 23% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 38% 13% 


68% of the trades will see price exceed a 10% rise. That sounds like a reason- 
able number. 

Wait for breakout. Because the breakout direction isn’t known until 
price closes outside one of the trendline boundaries, don’t try to anticipate the 
breakout direction. Price may reverse at the trendline, handing you a loss. 

Stops location. Let’s say price breaks out upward. Compute the target 
price and make a profit-and-loss assessment of the potential trade. What is the 
likely downward move compared with the target price? Does the potential profit 
justify the risk of the trade? For Figure 10.7, there is support in the 46-to-47 area. 

Looking for prior peaks and valleys helps determine support and resist- 
ance levels. In March 1995 (not shown in the figure), there was an area of 


Experience 147 


congestion bounded by a symmetrical triangle with an apex at about 46. 
Additional resistance appeared in July and October, as shown. Together, the 
46-to-47 area made a good location for a stop-loss order. 

Let’s say the stop price you select is at 45.75, just below the bottom of the 
support area. If the breakout price is 50.50 (which is the close the day after the 
upward breakout), that gives a potential loss of less than 10%. With a target 
price of 55.50, or 10% upside, the win/loss ratio is an unexciting one-to-one. 
In such a situation, you could either tighten your stop by moving it higher (and 
risk getting taken out by normal price action) or look elsewhere for a more 
profitable trade. 

Remember there is no rule that says you have to place a trade. Let me also 
say that I’m not a fan of win/loss ratios. If you trade patterns well, the profit 
should come. 

Intraformation trading. If the broadening pattern is tall enough, go 
long after price rebounds off the lower trendline and hope for an immediate 
upward breakout. Only try this if you’re an experienced swing trader and only 
after the pattern passes all of the identification guidelines. 

Partial decline. A partial rise correctly predicts a downward breakout 
47% of the time. However, a partial decline correctly predicts an upward 
breakout 75% of the time. So if you can tell when a partial decline is in 
place, meaning the broadening pattern is fully formed (see “Partial decline” 
in the Glossary for details), then consider buying the stock and hoping for 
an upward breakout. The partial decline might be a pause that happens as 
price moves to the lower trendline, so if price breaks out downward, then 
close out the position. Otherwise hold onto the trade and hope price starts 
to head back up. 

Busted trade. With a 60% average rise after a single busted downward 
breakout, busted patterns might be the way to profit from this chart pattern. 
See Table 10.9 for details. 


Experience 


I have traded this chart pattern a number of times. Let me tell you about what 
I found in my trade review. 


Cisco Systems 


Let’s start with three trades in Cisco Systems. All of them traded the same 
broadening pattern that formed in June to September 2000. 

In the first trade, the stock looked to be doing a partial decline. The 
pattern had a flat top with three trendline touches and three touches of the 


148 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


lower trendline, too, just as you would expect. The pattern looked ripe to 
break out upward in the high-tech boom of the 2000 market (but the gen- 
eral market turned bearish in March, before I bought. I’m not sure I knew 
that at the time). 

I bought the stock after it broke out of a small congestion area (it was 
a small downward trending pennant with an upward breakout buried within 
the broadening pattern). I expected the stock to break out upward from the 
broadening pattern. Instead, it touched the top trendline and headed lower. As 
a swing trade, it would have been good to sell then, but I didn’t. I rode the stock 
lower and sold after a downward breakout. 

The second trade was also within the same pattern, but I bought as price 
dropped before breaking out downward. This was a “hip shot,” a trade I just 
glance at and make, confident that it’ll work. Each time I pen those words 
in my trading notebook, I know the trade is going to be a loser (that’s what I 
learned over the years, perhaps well after this trade). Hip shots just don’t work 
for me. Now, I take my time to analyze the situation before trading. 

Anyway, I thought the stock was going to turn, but it didn’t. It kept 
going down. 

With the third trade, I bought at the lower trendline, expecting an upward 
bounce. Instead, it closed the day outside the pattern’s boundary, breaking out 
downward from the pattern. The next day, I closed out all three trades and 
took a loss of 15%, 8%, and 4% on them, respectively. 

My notebook tells what I learned. 


¢ Lesson: If an upside breakout from partial decline does not appear 
immediately, sell. 

¢ Lesson: Do not buy more of a stock as it moves downward across the 
broadening pattern. Wait for it to bounce off the bottom trendline. 
Otherwise, the breakout could be downward, resulting in multiple los- 
ing trades. 

¢ Lesson: Close out the trade when the market tells you you’re wrong. 


National Fuel Gas 


National Fuel Gas (NFG) in late 2004 formed a broadening pattern. This 
pattern broke out upward, and I bought the next day, the same day the stock 
closed back inside the pattern (I didn’t know it at the time). 

From my notebook: “9 March 2005. Buy reason: Busted triple top, upward 
breakout from RABFD [right-angled broadening formation, descending]. The 
other natural gas companies have stocks that are moving up almost vertically. 
This one is pausing from recent gains in the rounding turn. Earnings are weak, 
but the market doesn’t seem to mind. I expect the stock to move up as it fol- 
lows the other natural gas companies higher. Earnings come out in April, and I 


Experience 149 


expect them to be good, sending the stock higher. I think the price is anticipat- 
ing a strong showing. The stop is a close one just in case (7% away).” 

On 18 April, I have this curious entry: “I removed the stop intraday as 
I was getting used to my broker. The stock dipped below the stop price, but 
I didn’t have a stop in place, so I wasn’t taken out. Stop remains at 27.43.” 
‘To me that sounds confusing, as if I removed the stop and put it back in, too 
afraid that price would take me out. It worked this time, but it’s not a habit you 
want to form. 

On 29 April, I was stopped out of the stock and took a 6% loss. The tim- 
ing of the sale is odd, though. I sold when the stock was about midway down 
the height of the broadening pattern. My assessment of the trade says that I 
sold too early. 

Indeed, the stock continued lower. Two days later, the stock busted the 
upward breakout when it closed below the bottom of the pattern. But that 
was as far as it dropped. The stock climbed from there, busted the downward 
breakout, and soared like I thought it would originally. The stock peaked at 
63.71 in May 2008, a massive 133% above my sale price. You probably heard 
me yelling at the time about missing another big gain. 

I picked the right stock, at the right time, but watched from the sidelines 
as it became an eagle and soared. However, I think I traded this correctly. 
I bought the day after the breakout, so I got in quick at a good price and sold 
when it was clear the stock was dropping. Waiting for it to turn at the bottom 
of the pattern, in this case, was mot a mistake because it did break out down- 
ward. The stock just decided to turn back up from then on. 


¢ Lesson: Ifa stock doesn’t perform as expected, get out. 

¢ Lesson: Don’t lower or remove a stop unless you have a good reason 
for doing so. Being afraid price might trigger the stop is exactly the 
wrong reason for removing it. 


Southwest Airlines 


Southwest Airlines (LUV) in mid-2004 showed a similar situation. I identi- 
fied a broadening pattern in the spring and bought after the throwback com- 
pleted. In other words, I was late buying into the stock. Had I placed a buy 
stop a penny above the top horizontal line, it would have filled at 15.31 the day 
before the actual breakout. Instead, I bought in at 15.81, but that isn’t too far 
off the optimal entry price. 

From my trading notebook: “Mood (Will trade work? Bought too soon?): 
Cautious. Other airlines are moving lower, so I don’t really trust this one. Long 
term, I think the price is a good one. Short term, who knows? 

“Buy reason: Throwback from RABFD completed and oil prices are 
trending down. Since most of the fuel is hedged, the price won’t make much 


150 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


difference. If it can push through the HCR [horizontal consolidation region] 
(flag in Dec 2003), then this has a chance of moving up.” 

The stock formed a second broadening pattern and that one broke out 
upward, too, making a sharp rise upward (5% rise) in one day. The move 
looked like an earnings surprise where price shoots up and then retraces the 
move over the following week to 10 days. That’s what happened here, except 
earnings came out a few weeks later. 

My notes say I should have sold the day of the 5% spike and locked in a 
profit. Instead, I took a 3% loss when the stock returned to the price of the top 
of the broadening pattern, where I sold. 


¢ Lesson: When the market gives you a gift (the 5% rise), find the reason 
for the move and consider selling. 


I don’t know if that’s good advice or not. In earnings surprises, it can pay 
to hold on for months because the announcement generates excitement and 
that excitement pushes the stock up (after the retrace that is). In this case, I 
don’t know what caused the 5% rise. 


Con-way 


Con-way Inc. (CNF, now CNW) formed a broadening pattern starting 
in November 2003 and lasting until April 2004. Here’s my notebook entry: 
“21 April 2004. I bought at market, filled at 37.13, 11:06 am. This is an upside 
breakout from a right-angled broadening formation, descending. Measure rule 
says 41.14 is the target, call it 41. Downside is just below prior minor low, 34.33 
for 8% loss. The truckers are doing well right now, despite wishy-washy mar- 
ket and high fuel costs. The company also announced earnings that apparently 
were better than expected.” 

I bought the day after the upward breakout. Over the next two weeks, the 
stock threw back, but I survived by holding on. My fingers hurt. 

The stock started climbing in a measured move up type pattern (rise, 
retrace, rise). I raised the stop not once, nor twice, but seven times along the 
way to the sale. 

On 12 July, the stop-loss order took me out of the trade. From my note- 
book: “Mood (Sell too soon?): Good. The stop took me out and this morning 
[the stock] is trading even lower. Earnings are due in 5 days, so maybe the stock 
is signaling weak results. Time to move on as it pierced the trendline on the 
sell day.” 

What trendline am I referring to? The only idea I have is to draw one 
connecting the throwback low along the bottoms as price climbed. The stock 
broke out of a 10-day congestion region and pierced the up-sloping trendline 
at the same time. That’s when I sold. 


Sample Trade 151 


I made 8% on the trade, but sold too soon. Yes, the stock moved sideways 
for almost 3 months but eventually made its way to 61.87 or 54% higher than 
where I sold. 

For a swing trade (it wasn’t supposed to be), this was a good execution. 
I bought the day after the breakout and sold before weakness took the stock 
lower and threw it sideways to down for months. For a longer term position 
trade (which was intended), I missed the big gain. Again. 


¢ Lesson: When position trading, allow for more volatility to capture 
longer-term gains. 


Sample Trade 


Ralph is a pattern trader with a measure of experience milking chart patterns 
for all they are worth. When he noticed what he thought was either a descend- 
ing broadening wedge or a right-angled descending broadening formation, he 
bought the stock. His order, placed at point C in Figure 10.7 (46.38), was just 
after the stock bounced off the lower trendline. 

He monitored the stock closely and watched it move up the very next day, 
then ease lower. 


Flightsafety Intl. Inc. (Aerospace/Defense, NYSE, FSI) 


Close-up of Target Price 


Symmetrical 
Triangle Near 54 
Point C Stock Sold 

F: -53 


mn \ F =51 
f \ Wh, Support ~5° 


A Zone 


Apr 95 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 10.7. This descending broadening pattern has an upward breakout. To 
compute the measure rule for upward breakouts, find the difference between the 
high and low in the formation, denoted by points A and B. Add the height to point 
A to get the upward breakout target price. It took almost 7 months for price to 
exceed the target. A small symmetrical triangle appears at point C. 


152 Broadening Formation, Right-Angled and Descending 


“After a few days, I saw the symmetrical triangle form and got worried. 
Those things are unpredictable.” When the stock moved below the lower tri- 
angle trendline, Ralph sold the stock and closed out his trade at 46.50. 

He cleared the image on the screen and looked at a chart without any 
lines or indicators. Just price. 

Ralph smiled. “I made the right decision to sell because a partial rise,” such 
as where the triangle formed, “can predict an immediate downward breakout.” 

Sure enough, the following day price dropped even further, tagging the 
broadening formation trendline again. 

“Then the blasted thing bounced on me. Caught me by surprise. I wasn’t 
in the stock then, but I like to think I made the right decision to sell. The thing 
went all the way back up to A, right where I hoped it would go during my trade. 
But nooo!” 

Ralph took a small loss after factoring in commissions. 

“I sold at the right time. The stock broke out downward from the triangle 
and could have continued a lot lower. In hindsight, though, I could have waited 
to see if the stock found support at the lower trendline. It was close enough 
that I could have tolerated the potential loss. In this case, all I had to do was 
wait no more than 3 days before price started climbing to A.” 


11 


Broadening Tops 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price trends upward leading to the chart patterns. The pattern has a 
megaphone appearance with higher highs and lower lows that widen over time. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or Long-term bullish continuation —_Intermediate-term 

continuation bullish continuation 
Performance rank 22 out of 39 14 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 18% 18% 
Average rise 42% 25% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
‘Throwbacks 67% 64% 
Percentage meeting 66% 52% 

price target 
Synonyms Expanding triangle, broadening triangle, orthodox 


broadening top, and five-point reversal 


See also Broadening bottom 


153 


154 Broadening Tops 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term bear- Short-term 
ish reversal bearish reversal 

Performance rank 28 out of 36 14 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 27% 9% 
Average drop 13% 22% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
Pullbacks 67% 67% 
Percentage meeting 42% 46% 


price target 


Broadening tops, not surprisingly, look a lot like broadening bottoms. 
What separates a top from a bottom is the price trend leading to the chart pat- 
tern. For tops, the inbound price trend is upward; for broadening bottoms, it 
is downward. This is an arbitrary distinction I made just to see if the two chart 
patterns act differently. In answer to the question you have probably posed 
right now: Yes, the two formations have slightly different performance (but 
both are yucky). 

A brief review of the Results Snapshot shows the performance rank is 
midrange. The rank is based on how far price moves after the breakout com- 
pared to other chart pattern types. 

The breakeven failure rate for downward breakouts in bear markets is 
terrific, just 9%, but that ranks the pattern at 11 out of 19 (not shown). As small 
as the failure rate seems compared to the others shown in the table, it’s still a 
mid-list performer. 

The average rise varies from 25% in bear markets, where the general mar- 
ket is trying to drown price, and 42% in bull markets, where the market trend 
tugs on the stock like a helium balloon. The average decline is 13% in bull mar- 
kets, which compares to a 22% drop in bear markets. This time, bear markets are 
pulling price downward, hence the larger average drop than in bull markets. 


Tour 


Broadening patterns come in a variety of styles and names. There are the 
broadening tops and bottoms, right-angled ascending and descending, 
expanding triangle, orthodox broadening top, and five-point reversal. The last 
three—expanding triangle, orthodox broadening top, and five-point reversal— 
are synonyms for the broadening top, with the last two being based on five 
turning points. 


Beneficial Corp. (Financial Services, NYSE, BNL) 


Double Top 


Volume 


all 
A "yl tt 
i hy 


Jun 95 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 11.1 A potential triple top changed into a broadening formation. The 
one-day reversal appeared as the third peak after an unsustainably quick price 
rise. The broadening top formation marked a struggle between eager buyers and 
reluctant sellers at the lows and the quick-to-take-profit momentum players at 
the peaks. 


For a tour of the chart pattern, look at Figure 11.1. The stock began 
an uphill run in December 1994 and continued climbing to reach a high in 
mid-September at 53.75. Holders of the stock, enjoying the long run, decided 
to sell their shares and retire in Florida. The stock headed lower. On 25 Sep- 
tember 1995, volume spiked upward and halted the decline. Investors, seeing a 
40% retrace of their gains from the June peak, apparently thought the decline 
overdone and purchased the stock, sending price back up. 

Price peaked at a higher level, 54.50, on 19 October. Astute traders, who 
suspected a double top was forming, promptly sold their holdings to maxi- 
mize their gains, sending price tumbling. Price confirmed the double top when 
it fell below the confirmation price (below the lowest low between the two 
peaks), at 48.75. 

Volume picked up, and the struggle between supply and demand reasserted 
itself. The decline stalled as traders willing to buy the stock overwhelmed 
reluctant sellers. The stock turned around and headed higher. By this time, 
chart followers could draw the two trendlines—one across the twin peaks and 
another below the two valleys—giving birth to the broadening top pattern. 
‘Traders jumped on the bandwagon at this point and purchased the stock. They 
wanted to play the anticipated rise as the formation broadened out. The stock 
cooperated and moved higher, reaching the top trendline once again at a new 
high of 55.50. 


156 Broadening Tops 


The steepness of the ascent in the latter stages was unsustainable. The 
peak looked like a one-day reversal, with a close near the low of the day and a 
tall daily price swing. However, volume was unconvincing. It was higher that 
day than during the prior week, but it certainly was not of the caliber of the 
late November spike. 

In any case, the stock tumbled and soon reached a new low of 43.50, stop- 
ping right at the bottom trendline. Once the stock began moving higher, the 
momentum players jumped on board and volume increased along with price. 
Buying enthusiasm and rising momentum pushed the stock higher, climbing 
through the top trendline. An upward breakout occurred. 

Throughout the various peaks and troughs as this chart pattern unfolded, 
there was a struggle between buyers and sellers. Near the lows, the buyers 
believed the stock was oversold, and they eagerly bought it. At the top, they 
and others sold their shares and pocketed handsome profits. This selling pres- 
sure, of course, sent the stock back down. 

Some investors—seeing the stock decline below their purchase price 
and still believing that the stock had value—bought more. That behavior also 
helped turn the stock around at the lows and probably explained their height- 
ened nervousness at the top. They wanted to keep their gains this time instead 
of watching them evaporate should the stock decline again. 

The broadening top shown in the figure also makes evident that identi- 
fying the ultimate breakout is difficult. It appears that each new high or new 
low may be the final push to freedom. Only when price moves in the opposite 
direction is it clear that price will not break out. We explore ways to profit 
from that behavior in the Trading Tactics section. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 11.1 shows the identification guidelines for the broadening top. 

Appearance. The pattern looks like a megaphone with price peaks and 
valleys bounded by two diverging trendlines. The top trendline slopes upward, 
and the bottom one slopes downward. 

Price trend. The price trend leading to the start of the pattern is what 
differentiates a broadening top from a broadening bottom. For broadening 
tops, the price trend should be upward, leading to the chart pattern, not down- 
ward as in the broadening bottom. This is just an arbitrary designation I have 
chosen to distinguish tops from bottoms (in all chart pattern types). 

Trendlines. Trendlines drawn across the peaks and valleys resemble 
a megaphone. Higher highs and lower lows make the formation obvious to 
those versed in spotting chart patterns. The slope of the trendlines is what dis- 
tinguishes this chart pattern from others. The top trendline must slope up and 
the bottom one must slope down. When one of the two trendlines is horizontal 
or nearly so, the formation becomes a right-angled ascending or descending 


Identification Guidelines 157 


Table 11.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Megaphone shape with higher highs and lower lows. Five-point 
reversals have three peaks and two troughs. 

Price trend The price trend leading to the formation should be up. Ignore any 
overshoot or undershoot within 2 weeks of the pattern’s start. 


Trendlines Price is bounded by two trendlines: The top one slopes upward, and the 
bottom one slopes downward. 


Touches Should have at least five touches, three on one trendline and two on the 
other, but not necessarily alternating touches. Price passing through a 
trendline doesn’t count as a touch. 


Volume Trends upward most often. Do not discard a pattern because of an 
adverse volume trend. 
Breakout The breakout can occur in either direction and, in several cases, 
direction price moves horizontally for several months before staging a 


definitive breakout. 


broadening formation. When the two trendlines slope in the same direction, 
the formation is a broadening wedge. 

Touches. There should be at least five touches of the trendlines: two on 
one trendline and three on the other, but be flexible. Five (or more) minor high 
or minor low touches makes for a well-formed pattern. Fewer touches than 
five often leads to incorrectly identified patterns. 

Avoid counting it as a touch when price slices through a trendline (no 
minor high or low involved). That’s common at the start and end of the broad- 
ening pattern. Figure 11.3 shows an example of this on both ends of the bottom 
trendline. The trendline cuts through price and does not rest on a minor low, 
so it doesn’t count as a touch. 

Page back to Figure 11.1. It shows three minor highs touching the top 
trendline and four minor lows either nearing or touching the bottom trend- 
line. The minor highs and minor lows need not alternate as price crisscrosses 
the broadening pattern (but usually do). 

Volume. Linear regression on volume shows it trending up most often. 
Many times, the volume pattern mimics the price pattern: rising and falling 
along with price, but the overall trend will be upward. Many times, you can tell 
the volume trend by dividing the pattern in half and estimating which half has 
higher volume. 

Breakout direction. A breakout happens when price closes outside one 
of the trendline boundaries or follows a trendline for an extended time. In the 
figure, if you extend the top trendline upward, it will intersect price at about 
58. That’s a long time to wait for a breakout. 

When a breakout occurs, I consider the actual breakout price to be the 
value of the highest peak in the pattern. In the figure, for example, the breakout 


158 Broadening Tops 


price is 55.50, or the high at the one-day reversal. Determining the breakout 
price is one of the challenges of trading a broadening top. 

For an example of how to apply the various guidelines, consider the 
broadening top shown in Figure 11.2. At first glance, it looks like a large 
megaphone with price trends that generally follow two sloping trendlines. The 
top trendline slopes upward and the bottom one slopes downward, each inter- 
secting the minor highs or lows at least twice, totaling at least five touches. 

Price forms higher highs and lower lows until it breaks out of the chart 
pattern, closing beyond the line of trend or below turn 5. 

The volume pattern generally rises as price moves up and recedes as 
price moves down. The figure shows this quite clearly. During the rise in 
mid-November, for example, volume jumped upward as price peaked, then 
just as quickly receded as price declined. 

Figure 11.3 shows a U-shaped volume trend. Volume is higher in 
September and December, and lower in the intervening months. 

Orthodox broadening tops and five-point reversals describe the same 
type of pattern. They are simply broadening tops that have three minor highs 
and two minor lows. Figure 11.3, for example, falls into this category. Other 
than the name, I found no substantial difference between broadening tops, 
orthodox broadening tops, and five-point reversals. 

Some analysts say five-point reversals are bearish indicators, and that the 
formation predicts a downward breakout. A study of the pattern, admittedly 
using only 30 samples, suggests this is untrue. Sixteen break out upward and 
the others (14, but check my math) break out downward. However, the sample 
size is too small to make a definitive statement. 


ASA Ltd (Investment Co. (Domestic), NYSE, ASA) 


Wok | 
I! 


Aug 91 Se Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr Ma Jun 
9g p Pp y 


Figure 11.2 The broadening top has higher highs and lower lows as the price 
swings widen over time. 


Focus on Failures 159 


Albertsons Inc. (Grocery, NYSE, ABS) 


| - 39 
\ 38 
— 37 
Prices Fail to Attain We 


wal Trend Line 


va | i if ha | ; 7 
ii pitt | lt bl | 
False Breakout \ = 


My 
Fath nt! | 
tl! 1 \k Hy nl I if 
\ W et nl 


Jun 95 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 11.3 A weak example of a five-point reversal or orthodox broadening top. 
It has three minor highs and two minor lows composing the five turning points. 


Focus on Failures 


What does a broadening top failure look like? Figure 11.3 shows a sharp down- 
ward breakout day thrust that pierces the bottom trendline on high volume. 
Since this is clearly below the lower trendline, and coupled with the failure of 
price to attain the upper trendline (a partial rise), a downward breakout is at hand. 

The downward plunge is like a mountain climber hitting a ledge. Price 
stalls on very high volume, recovers, and starts climbing again. This is an 
example of a 5% failure; that is, price breaks out and then moves no more than 
5% in the direction of the breakout before moving substantially in the other 
direction. 

Contrast the behavior shown in Figure 11.3 with that shown in 
Figure 11.4. I include this chart because I have noticed that a large number 
of broadening formations act this way. Instead of making a clear up or down 
thrust that pierces the trendline, price moves horizontally for months before 
finally closing above or below the formation highs or lows. 

In this case, price declined below the low in early July and halted (the last 
trendline touch at pattern’s end). Price climbed for a bit then receded again 
and reached a new low in early August. It looks as if price vaulted over the 
August volume spike. 

Another recovery saw price rise no higher than 44 for about half a year 
before finally staging an upward breakout. The breakout happened when price 
closed above the top of the chart pattern. The sideways move isn’t a 5% failure, 
but it tries the patience of traders waiting for something to happen. 


160 Broadening Tops 


Arco Chemical Co. (Chemical (Basic), NYSE, RCM) 


— 49 
48 
Breakout 


Point =47 


a 36 
Mar 93 — Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan94 Feb Mar 
Figure 11.4 Price in this broadening top moved horizontally for 6 months before 


staging an upward breakout. This horizontal movement is a common occurrence 
with broadening tops. 


Table 11.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 1,215 200 804 205 
Reversal (R), 100% C 100% C 100% R 100% R 

continuation 

(C) occurrence 
Average rise 42% 25% -13% -22% 

or decline 
Standard & Poor’s 12% -1% -2% -11% 

500 change 
Days to ultimate 253 91 56 37 

high or low 
How many 52% 41% 23% 45% 


change trend? 


Statistics 


Table 11.2 shows general statistics for this chart pattern. 

Number found. I uncovered 2,424 broadening tops in data from July 
1991 to November 2019 in 873 stocks. Not all stocks covered the entire time, 
and some of them no longer trade. 


Statistics 161 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, since we are 
dealing with a top, an upward breakout is a continuation and a downward 
breakout means a reversal of the prevailing upward trend. 

Average rise or decline. I compared the average rise or decline with the 
average for all chart pattern types and found that the broadening top under- 
performs in all market conditions (bull/bear) and breakout directions, despite 
what you see in the table. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Notice how the general market helped 
or hindered price. The numbers, when compared to the average rise or decline, 
suggest trading with the market trend (bull market, upward breakouts and bear 
market, downward breakouts) for the best performance. This makes intui- 
tive sense. 

Days to ultimate high or low. The time it takes price to rise to the ulti- 
mate high or sink to the ultimate low varies from 253 days (about 8.5 months) 
to 37 (5 weeks). 

I compared the average speed of price for upward versus downward break- 
outs in bull markets. The decline should have taken 79 days, but the average 
is 56 as shown in the table. Thus, price drops faster than it rises. In this case, 
it’s not quite twice as fast (which is what I’ve seen in other chart pattern types). 

Comparing the two bear market columns, we see price rise 25% in 
91 days and drop 22% in 37 days. If price dropped as fast as it climbed, it 
should have taken 80 days to drop 22%. In this case, price drops more than 
twice as fast in bear markets as it rises. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many broadening 
tops see price move more than 20% away from the breakout price. I like to see 
values above 50%, but only one of the columns qualifies. 

Table 11.3 shows failure rates for broadening tops. I found that 18% of 
broadening tops in bull markets after upward breakouts fail to see price rise 
more than 5%. That’s how you read the table. 

Here’s another example. Just over half (52%) of patterns in bull markets 
with downward breakouts fail to see price drop more than 10%. Notice how 
quickly failure rates increase. 

Bear markets with downward breakouts have the lowest failure rate ini- 
tially, 9%, but the edge over bull markets with up breakouts does not last long. 
For moves of 15% and higher, bull markets with upward breakouts maintain a 
lower failure rate. 

How is this information useful? Imagine that the measure rule predicts 
price will climb from 40 to 50, a 10-point rise. That’s a move of 25%. How 
many broadening tops in bull markets, on average, will see price rise more than 
25%? Answer: 46%. To put it another way, 54% of them will fail to see price 
rise more than 25%. 

Table 11.4 shows breakout-related statistics for broadening tops. 

Breakout direction. In bull markets, price breaks out upward most 
often. In bear markets, the breakout direction is random. 


162 Broadening Tops 


Table 11.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum 
Price Rise or Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Decline (%) Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 219 or 18% 35 or 18% 219 or 27% 19 or 9% 
10 160 or 31% 31 or 33% 196 or 52% 30 or 24% 
15 119 or 41% 24 or 45% 125 or 67% 39 or 43% 
20 81 or 48% 28 or 59% 83 or 77% 25 or 55% 
25 78 or 54% 22 or 70% 60 or 85% 27 or 68% 
30 62 or 59% 10 or 75% 40 or 90% 16 or 76% 
35 62 or 64% 9 or 80% 26 or 93% 13 or 82% 
50 121 or 74% 19 or 89% 45 or 99% 28 or 96% 
75 122 or 84% 10 or 94% 9 or 100% 5 or 99% 
Over 75 191 or 100% 12 o0r100% 1 or 100% 3 or 100% 


Yearly position, performance. I sorted the breakout price into one of 
three bins. Upward breakouts show the best performance when the breakout 
price appears in the middle third of the yearly high-low price range. Down- 
ward breakouts favor the lowest third of the range. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. A throwback or pullback occurs about two- 
thirds of the time, and it takes 11 or 12 days to complete the trip back to the 
breakout price (on average). 

In all cases, when a throwback or pullback occurs, performance suffers. 
To avoid a throwback or pullback, look for nearby support or resistance that 
is strong enough to turn price back. Good luck with that. I’ve not been able to 
predict whether a throwback or pullback will happen. I just assume they will 
and go from there. If they don’t appear, I’m as happy as a kid with a bag full of 
candy on Halloween. 

You might try looking for overhead resistance or underlying support 
within 5% to 11% away from the pattern (those percentages are averages of 
how far price travels in 6 days, according to the table). 

Gaps. Sometimes a breakout day gap helps and sometimes not. Down- 
ward breakouts have results that are one percentage point apart, so they may 
not be statistically significant. Upward breakouts see better performance if a 
gap is absent. That’s counter to normal trading wisdom. Other chart patterns 
see performance improve if a gap occurs. 

If you want to participate in a gap trade, know that I measured perfor- 
mance using the opening price the day after the gap, so you can buy a stock 
after it shows a gap and maybe you can participate in the better performance. 


Table 11.4 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Statistics 163 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 60% up 49% up 40% down 51% down 
Performance L 34%, L 23%, L-16%, L-23%, 

of breakouts M 46%, M 26%, M -14%, M -22%, 

occurring near H 41% H 25% H -12% H -17% 

the 12-month low 

(L), middle (M), 

or high (H) 
Throwbacks/ 67% 64% 67% 67% 

pullbacks 

occurrence 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


5% in7 days 7%in6édays -6%in6days  -11% in 7 days 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback ends 

Average rise/decline 38% 24% 
for patterns 
with throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 

Average rise/ 48% 26% 
decline for 
patterns without 
throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 

Percentage price 75% 69% 54% 49% 
resumes trend 

Performance with 38% 22% 
breakout day gap 

Performance without 42% 26% 
breakout day gap 


12 days 11 days 11 days 12 days 


-13% -19% 


-14% -26% 


-14% -21% 


-13% -22% 


Average gap size $0.84 $0.35 $0.92 $0.63 


Table 11.5 shows statistics related to size. 

Height. In all cases, tall patterns see better post-breakout performance 
than short ones. 

To use this finding, measure the pattern’s height from the highest high to 
the lowest low. Divide the difference by the breakout price (for upward break- 
outs, it is the highest high in the pattern; for downward breakouts, use the low- 
est low). Then compare the result with the median shown in the table. A result 


164 Broadening Tops 


Table 11.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 

Tall pattern 46% 26% -16% -22% 
performance 

Short pattern 36% 24% -12% -21% 
performance 

Median height as 10.6% 15.2% 10.9% 18.5% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 

Narrow pattern 39% 26% -13% -21% 
performance 

Wide pattern 44% 24% -14% -22% 
performance 

Median width 45 days 45 days 38 days 41 days 

Short and narrow 38% 28% -11% -20% 
performance 

Short and wide 35% 13% -11% -23% 
performance 

Tall and wide 47% 29% -16% -22% 
performance 

Tall and narrow 43% 20% -15% -22% 
performance 


higher than the median means you have a tall pattern; lower means a shorter 
pattern. For best results, select tall broadening tops and avoid short ones. 

Width. In three of four contests (columns), wide patterns see better post- 
breakout performance than do narrow ones. The one exception happens in 
bear markets after upward breakouts. 

I found it odd that bear market, up breakout percentages for height and 
width are the same. I checked my spreadsheet, and the information is correct. 

‘To use width as an indicator, compute the time from the end of the pat- 
tern to the start (in calendar days, not price bars). If the result is more than the 
median listed in the table, then you have a wide pattern. 

Height and width combinations. Table 11.5 shows the performance 
results after combining the characteristics of height and width. Most of the 
time, tall and wide patterns show the best performance. In bear markets, after 
downward breakouts, short and wide patterns outperform. That’s probably a 
statistical fluke, and the percentages are close, anyway. 

Table 11.6 shows volume-related statistics. 


Statistics 165 


Table 11.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 67% up 73% up 67% up 66% up 
Rising vol- 42% 27% -14% -23% 

ume trend 

performance 
Falling vol- 41% 19% -13% -20% 

ume trend 

performance 
Heavy break- 41% 25% -14% -21% 

out volume 

performance 
Light break- 43% 24% -13% -23% 

out volume 

performance 


Volume trend. Volume trends upward from 66% to 73% of the time on 
average. However, don’t throw away a trade because the pattern has a down- 
ward volume trend. Try to recycle. 

Rising/Falling volume. Half the time, the volume trend doesn’t really 
matter to performance. In bear markets, we see a wider separation of results. For 
example, after upward breakouts in bear markets, price averages a climb of 27% 
compared to just 19% for patterns with falling volume. The sample counts (146 
versus 54, respectively) are not as robust as I like to see, so the results may change. 

Breakout day volume. The broadening top is a rebel: It doesn’t conform 
to common wisdom about heavy breakout volume (which is, heavy breakout 
volume helps performance). As the table shows, sometimes it helps, sometimes 
it hurts, and half the time it can’t make up its mind. However, as a general rule, 
you should see improved performance (probably meager) if breakout day vol- 
ume is above the prior 30-day average. 

I added Table 11.7 to this edition to highlight where price might stop 
on the way to the ultimate high or low. For example, I found that 79% of the 
time, price will return to the top of the pattern after an upward breakout. You'll 
likely be stopped out a lot if you choose to place a stop-loss order there. 

Place a stop at the bottom of the pattern and a stop-loss order will be hit 
less than 5% of the time, on average. However, the size of the loss, after an 
upward breakout, could be large, so do consider the size of the potential loss 
before deciding where to place a stop. 

Table 11.8 shows how the chart pattern performed over three decades. 
This table only shows bull market numbers because bear markets only hap- 
pened in the 2000s. 


166 Broadening Tops 


Table 11.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Bull Market, Bear Market, —_ Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 79% 79% 3% 2% 
Middle 24% 20% 18% 8% 
Pattern 4% 3% 75% 67% 
bottom 
Table 11.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 40% -16% 
2000s 49% -12% 
2010s 36% -13% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 14% 17% 
2000s 15% 29% 
2010s 23% 33% 


Performance over time. Upward breakouts saw the best performance and 
downward breakouts saw the worst performance in the 2000s. That makes sense. 
If the market is rising after an upward breakout, those patterns with downward 
breakouts will struggle to see price drop. It’s like trying to swim against the current. 

Failures over time. Failures have increased over the three decades for 
both upward and downward breakout directions. That’s not a good omen for 
future performance. 

Table 11.9 shows busted pattern performance. See the Glossary (“Busted 
pattern”) for details on what a busted pattern looks like and how to spot one. 
Don’t forget your binoculars. 

Busted patterns count. Almost half (47%) of broadening tops will bust 
in bull markets after downward breakouts. Notice that the fewest busted pat- 
terns happen after downward breakouts in bear markets. There you have the 
market current (downward) carrying along price as it drops after a downward 
breakout. The sample count, at 30, is tiny compared to the some of the others. 

Busted occurrence. I counted the types of busts (single, double, or more 
than two) and found that single busts happen most often. In second place for 
downward breakouts is triple (or more) busts. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared the performance of 
all busts (one, two, and triple+) with single busted and patterns that don’t bust 
(non-busted). Busted patterns outperform when the busted breakout direction 


Trading Tactics 167 


Table 11.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns 351 0r29% 57 o0r29% 379 or 47% 30 or 15% 

count 
Single bust count 1760r50% 42 or 74% 252 or 66% 21 or 70% 
Double bust count 115 or 33% 11 or 19% 12 or 3% 4 or 13% 
Triple+ bust count 60 or 17% 4 or 7% 115 or 30% 5 or 17% 
Performance for all -14% -20% 38% 38% 

busted patterns 
Single busted -22% -25% 55% 53% 

performance 
Non-busted -13% -22% 42% 25% 

performance 


matches the market trend (upward breakout in bull markets and downward 
breakout in bear markets). 

Recall that after upward breakouts in bull markets, the stock will bust 
by dropping. So the stock is heading down (and showing better performance, 
too!), even as the general market is rising. The same applies to busted down- 
ward breakouts (price rises) in bear markets (many stocks drop). 

Why does this happen? My only guess is that stockholders know a good 
or bad situation when they see it and trade with enthusiasm, in spite of what’s 
happening in the general market. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 11.10 outlines trading tactics for broadening tops. 

Measure rule. The first thing to consider about trading tactics is the 
measure rule. The measure rule predicts the price to which the stock will move 
(in theory). For many chart patterns, one simply computes the height of the 
chart pattern and adds or subtracts the height from the breakout price. Apply 
the same method to broadening tops. 

Consider Figure 11.5 as an example. The height of the broadening top is 
the difference between the highest high (B, 12.13) and the lowest low (A, 10), 
or 2.13. For upward breakouts, add the height to the highest high in the chart 
pattern, giving a target of 14.26, as shown in the figure. 

For downward breakouts, subtract the height from the bottom of the 
pattern, giving a target of 7.87. If the computation gives a target below zero, 
then don’t use the measure rule. If the target is too far away (21% in this case), 
there’s a good chance price won’t drop that far. Use common sense. 


168 


Trading Tactic 


Broadening Tops 


Table 11.10 
Trading Tactics 


Explanation 


Measure rule 


Go long at 
the bottom 


Long stop 


Go short 
at the top 


Short stop 


Partial rise 
and decline 


Stop location 
Busted trade 


Compute the height between the highest high and the lowest low in 
the pattern. Add the height to or subtract it from the highest high or 
lowest low, respectively. The result is the target price for upward and 
downward breakouts. The bottom portion of the table shows how 
often the measure rule works. 


Once a broadening top appears, buy after the stock makes its turn at 
the bottom trendline. 

Place a stop-loss order 15 cents below a nearby minor low. Should the 
stock reverse course, you will be protected. 


Sell short after price starts heading down at the top. 


Place a stop 15 cents above a nearby minor high to protect against 
an adverse breakout. Cover the short when it turns at the bottom 
trendline and starts moving up. For a downward breakout, cover as it 
nears the target price or any support level. 


Go long if a broadening top shows a partial decline. Consider adding 
to your position once it makes an upward breakout. Partial declines 
work 72% of the time in bull markets. Partial rises (downward break- 
out, bull markets) work 52% of the time. 

See Table 11.7 for stop location guidance. 


Table 11.9 can help with busted patterns. 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage 83% 73% 70% 73% 
reaching half 
height target 
Percentage 66% 52% 42% 46% 
reaching full 
height target 
Percentage reach- 48% 26% 19% 24% 
ing 2x height 
Percentage reach- 37% 18% 9% 13% 


ing 3x height 


The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches the meas- 
ure rule target. For the full height (as in our example above, bull markets, 
upward breakouts), price will reach the target 66% of the time. You can adjust 
the height to get different targets that may be easier or harder for price to reach. 

Once you know the target, read the text associated with Table 11.3 to see 
if the potential move is reasonable. 


Trading Tactics 169 


How do you make use of the measure rule? Imagine that you are consid- 
ering purchasing the stock. Try the following tips: 

Go long at the bottom. Since a broadening formation should have five 
touches (three on one trendline, two on the other) before it becomes valid, 
point A in Figure 11.5 shows one likely investment location. Before placing the 
buy order, compute the target price using the measure rule. The target price 
will help you determine if the potential gain is worth the risk. 

In the example shown in Figure 11.5, the purchase price is about 10.38 
(at A) and the target price is 14.25, a 37% move. The stop-loss should be 9.85 
(15 cents below the low at A), for a potential loss of 5%, which gives a reward- 
to-risk ratio of 7 to 1, more than enough to risk a trade. 

Long stop. Buy the stock soon after it touches the lower trendline and 
moves higher (after the pattern has fully developed following the identifica- 
tion guidelines). Place a stop-loss order 15 cents below the lowest low (0.15 
below point A). Should price drop, your position will likely be sold before a 
large loss occurs. 

Price climbs across the pattern. Be ready to sell once price reaches the 
prior minor high. Confused? Look at Figure 11.3. On the way to point 5, be 
prepared to sell as the stock climbs to the price of point 3. Price may pause for 
a bit before moving higher and tagging the top trendline, or it may reverse at 
this point (which it does in Figure 11.3, at point 5). Make sure your stops have 
been raised to protect your profits. 

Go short at the top, short stop. For short positions in broadening tops, 
open the short after price touches point B (Figure 11.5) and begins heading 
down. Place a stop 15 cents above the highest high (12.28 in this case) to 
limit losses. Lower your stop to the next minor high or apex of the broaden- 
ing top (either 11.88 or 11.13 in Figure 11.5) once the stock nears point A. 
Sometimes the stock will not make it down to the trendline before beginning 
to move up. At other times, there is a lengthy pause before price turns around 
or continues down. A lower stop-loss point helps you achieve at least some 
measure of profit. 

Partial rise and decline. Partial rises and declines are like deer in mat- 
ing season when yow’re driving: Look out for them. See the Glossary (“Partial 
rise” or “Partial decline”) for details on spotting the pesky critters. When you 
see a partial rise or decline, place a trade once the stock reverses course. If a 
breakout happens, then consider adding to your position. 

Using a partial rise or decline to enter a trade before the breakout is a 
reliable trading technique. You get in at a better price, and they accurately 
predict the breakout direction. 

Stop location. Use Table 11.7 for guidance on stop placement. 

Busted trade. Consult Table 11.9 for tips on trading busted patterns. 
If you are lucky enough to trade a single busted pattern, you can make a 
lot of money. 


170 Broadening Tops 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Advanced Micro Devices Inc. 


Advanced Micro Devices Inc. (AMD) formed a broadening top in the first half 
of 2001. Here’s my notebook for the trade entry: “2 August 2001. I bought at 
the market, filled at 19.64. The stock has bounced off the bottom of a broad- 
ening top. I hope prices will race across the pattern, but expect them to stall at 
22, with eventual push to 25. Downside is old low at 16, or lower [trendline] 
boundary. Upside is 25, with possibilities of a climb into the high 30s. Resist- 
ance at 22, 25, 30. I expect a climb to 25 where it may be time to sell. Book 
score is +1, assuming an upward breakout.” 

The book score is based on my book, Trading Classic Chart Patterns, which 
describes a scoring system to help improve selecting patterns that outperform. 
In this case, it didn’t apply because the breakout was downward. 

Notice that I didn’t dwell on the potential loss (in percentage terms). Had 
I pondered that, I might have avoided this losing trade. 


¢ Lesson: Don’t forget to assess the potential loss and avoid the trade if 
the loss is too high. 


I bought the day the stock peaked. It dropped from there and soon was at 
the chart pattern’s bottom trendline and dropping below it. 

Here’s my notebook: “15 August 2001. I sold at market. Fundamentals 
have changed with IBM saying they will no longer buy AMD-based com- 
puters because customers prefer Intel. The stock has completed a partial 
rise and is expected to break out downward from the broadening formation. 
Yesterday, [the stock] closed below the 16 stop price, so it was time to sell. 
With September [traditionally the weakest month of the year] and Octo- 
ber approaching, it’s probably wise to exit the market. On the other hand, 
I don’t really see the stock going much lower and expect that I sold near 
the bottom.” 

In fact, the stock continued lower. Much lower. I sold at 15.70 for a 20% 
loss, but the stock bottomed at 7.69 or 51% below my sale price. As big as my 
loss was, I’m glad I sold. 

Looking at the chart for the buy, the stock was well away from the bottom 
trendline, moving higher at a brisk pace (6 days in a row, it made a higher high). 
Maybe that was an indication of weakness. How long can the stock continue 
such a strong push upward? Perhaps running the chart through a momentum 
indicator would have provided a clue to the underlying weakness. 

In this trade, I entered late but made a perfect exit (on the day price broke 
out downward). 


Experience 171 


¢ Lesson: Before buying, don’t be afraid to use technical indicators to 
uncover a weakening trend. 


Chico’s FAS 


The 2009 bear market ended for Chico’s FAS (CHS) in January, and the stock 
moved higher, ahead of the general market which didn’t bottom until March. 
In June and July, the stock took a breather and formed the broadening top. 
I bought at what looks to be about a week before the breakout, just as price 
moved sideways at the top of the pattern. “24 July 2009. Buy reason: Broaden- 
ing top. New management took over in January-February, so a turnaround is 
in place.” This was a buy-and-hold stock because I wanted to participate in the 
turnaround. Upside target was 17 and 27. The downside? “Stop: 8.94 -17.5%. 
Stop used: None. Long-term holding, but 8 is a good exit price.” 

The stock performed, moved up in a graceful turn, and peaked at 16.57 
on 26 April 2010, quite close to my 17 target. I should have sold there. The 
stock was just 2.6% below my target, having made it there in less than a year. 
Hindsight. . . 


¢ Lesson: If the stock closes within 3% [or pick a value] of the target, 
consider selling. 


The day the stock peaked, I placed a conditional order to sell the stock if 
the previous close was at or below 13.73 by October 2010. The order was 17% 
below the current high, but that’s fine for a buy-and-hold, which often doesn’t 
use stops at all. 

About 3 weeks after the stock peaked, the company announced earnings 
that the market didn’t like. The stock gapped open lower and continued down. 
Here’s where the story gets strange. 

The stock dropped all the way back to 8.22 (on 24 August, a 50% drop 
from the peak), but the conditional order never triggered. I must have removed 
the order but never made a note of it. 

On 5 July, I wrote this: “This is well past the time to sell, but since I have 
so few bucks in it, don’t worry about it.” 

So the stock was within a handshake of my target and then dropped in half. 
Oops. 1am tempted to write that I wasn’t paying attention, but I was. I placed 
the conditional order the day the stock peaked, so my mind was in the game. 

Anyway, fast forward to March 2012 after the stock had recovered and 
made what looked like two rounded turns. “I placed a trailing stop at 1 point 
below the bid, GTC [good till canceled] until 1 July 2012.” Two weeks later, 
I canceled the trailing stop of 14.64 and raised it to 14.91 because, “I think this 
is going to drop. It’s a good earnings event pattern, and I don’t want to ride it 
down a buck before it moves higher. Stop placed just below support.” 

Four days later, I was out of the stock. “Sell reason: Hit stop. I was wor- 
ried that the overhead resistance area would repulse shares and send the stock 


172 Broadening Tops 


down after the good earnings event. I didn’t want to ride it back down. My 
guess is this will drop but not much before resuming the up move providing 
the market moves higher. It has been [moving higher] but just by a little each 
day. If the market drops, which I expect, it should take this stock lower, too. But 
so far, I’ve been waiting for the general market to tank, and it hasn’t.” 

The stock did continue lower but only by 9% below my sale price. The 
stock peaked about a year later at 19.95 before sliding all the way down below 
1 in April 2020. 

I made 42% on the trade (including dividends), but it took just over 
2.5 years to do that. However, that’s almost 16% a year, which is quite good. 

This lesson is worth repeating, though. . . 


¢ Lesson: If the stock closes within 3% [or pick a value] of the target, 
consider selling. 


Southwest Airlines 


Southwest Airlines (LUV) made a broadening top going into 2001. Prices in 
the following notebook entries have not been adjusted for the 3:2 stock split. 
On 26 January, “I bought at the market on a broadening top, price is at [the] 
lower trendline, but moving up. The [company is] successfully hedging their 
fuel costs. I expect oil prices to decline, FED [Federal Reserve] to ease interest 
rates next week, and economy to slowly rebound. 

“T actually think this will be a loser trade, but broadening top chapter in 
new book [this one] says it is a strong candidate to buy. I expect a partial rise 
with downside breakout. Upside is formation top at 35, downside is stop-loss 
at 27.30, call it 27.25, for a 10% decline. If it closes below 28, that is sell signal. 
Dump immediately. Filled at 30.39.” 

I didn’t buy exactly at the bottom of the broadening bottom (28.20), so 
that’s something I can improve on. 


¢ Lesson: Try to buy as close to the optimum entry price as possible (the 
lower trendline in this case). 


The stock continued to move higher, but halfway up the chart pattern, 
it stalled. That’s common and wasn’t a cause for concern until price started 
backtracking. 

“12 February 2001. I sold at 31.18 because of a partial rise on the broad- 
ening top. Since I believe this is going down, there was no sense to wait for it 
to close below 28 before dumping. I made a small profit, about 2.5%.” 

For a swing trade, I got in late and exited late, too, hurting the profit 
margin. Looking at the chart, the picture looks like a head-and-shoulders top. 
The partial rise is the right shoulder, and it’s at the height of the left shoulder. 
I should have been prepared for the stock to turn lower there because of the 
mirror on the left side of the pattern. 


Sample Trade 173 


¢ Lesson: As price moves, pay attention to the surrounding price land- 
scape for clues to how the stock may behave. Look for support and 
resistance areas where the stock might reverse. 

¢ Lesson: Play with price mirrors. 


Price mirror: Pick a vertical turning point on the price chart and reflect 
the left side of the chart onto the empty, right side. The peaks and valleys on 
the right, in the future, might match the ones that happened in the past. It’s 
better than sex when it works, and it gives you some idea of what the future 
could bring. 

For example, if you were to flip the chart across the head of a head-and- 
shoulders top, you'd see that the right shoulder will match the distance and 
price of the left shoulder. You can continue the analysis for the rest of the chart, 
too, giving both price and time on the turns. 


Sample Trade 


“If you wait long enough,” Sandra sold me, “you get rewarded.” 
My stomach growled. I was wondering if she’d reward me with a meal. 
She’s a terrific cook. Instead, she pulled up Figure 11.5 on her computer screen. 


Esterline Technologies (Precision Instrument, NYSE, ESL) 


_ Double Top _ 


| iy ; 7 
i | 
Lp yl 


Target Price 
-14 


r 


Il lh | Flag Formation 
| th . 


12 
1 


Hh al 
| 


= 1 
ln fe : . | ~10 
i ,. ip ral A ae reas nein 
H rtf I \ -9 
L. dy 
| Im " ul I 
In | =e 
7 
Jul 91 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 11.5 Use the measure rule to compute the target price. First, compute 
the formation height from the highest high to the lowest low, then add or subtract 
the height from the highest high or lowest low, respectively. Depending on the 
breakout direction, the result is the expected target price. 


174 Broadening Tops 


“Two days after the stock bottomed [at A], I bought at 10.50. I placed 
a stop 15 cents below the bottom of the pattern [below A] for a potential 
loss of 6%.” 

She applied the measure rule and was looking at a target of 14.25. If eve- 
rything worked as expected, that would give her a profit of over 35%. 

“When price paused here,” she pointed near the start of the flag, “I won- 
dered if the trend was going to reverse. I thought about cashing out and run- 
ning to the bank, but didn’t. I decided to drive.” 

She winked at me and smiled at her pun. 

“The flag formed, and I hoped it would be a half-staff pattern, meaning 
the flag was halfway up the move.” If that were true, she could expect a climb 
to 13.25 (that is the distance from the top of the flag (12.13) to the start of the 
move at 10.00 projected upward using the lowest low in the flag at 11.13). 

A few days later, the stock not only fulfilled the measure rule for the flag, 
but for the broadening top as well. 

“Did you sell?” 

“No.” 

“Why not?” 

“Because the stock was moving up. I decided to let my profits ride. How- 
ever, I did raise my stop to 11.85,” which was below the top of the flag and 
also below the high at B. “I thought it was a support area and hoped the stock 
would rebound before taking me out.” 

“In mid-February, just after the second peaked at 17, I saw a potential 
double top pattern. I raised my stop to 15 cents below the double bottom’s 
confirmation point, or 14.25.” 

About 2 weeks after raising her stop, her position sold when the stock 
plunged from the prior close at 15.63 to 12.13. After commissions, she made 
33% in less than 4 months. 

My stomach growled again. 

“Yes, I’ll feed you. I make this killer Swiss cheese, macaroni, and veg- 
gies casserole, lightly topped with toasted breadcrumbs. It has enough carbs to 
power the city. Let’s go.” 

She grabbed my hand, towed me to her kitchen, and handed me a car- 
rot peeler. 


“What’s this?” I asked. 


12 


Broadening Wedge, 
Ascending 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price follows two up-sloping trendlines that diverge. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average rise 

Volume trend 
‘Throwbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average drop 

Volume trend 

Pullbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


Long-term bullish continuation 
23 out of 39 

15% 

41% 

Upward 

68% 

61% 


Short-term bearish reversal 
33 out of 36 

31% 

12% 

Upward 

62% 

71% 


175 


176 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 


The Results Snapshot shows statistics for the ascending broadening 
wedge. Since the pattern is so rare in bear markets, I limit discussion to bull 
markets only. 

Upward breakouts show a rank that’s mid-list, but downward breakouts 
show performance near the bottom of the list of all chart patterns. Notice 
how the failure rate for downward breakouts (31%) is twice that of upward 
breakouts (15%). It sends a shiver down my bones. 

Downward breakouts in bull markets have failure rates (31%) well 
above the average 24.7% of all chart pattern types. If you’re expecting a big 
drop after this pattern breaks out downward, then you'll be disappointed. Of 
course, that’s based on the average performance drop of 12%, so your pattern 
may perform differently. For the glass-half-full crowd, you can buy a busted 
downward breakout, and there’s a good chance it’ll single bust, meaning a 
higher profit potential when price rises. 

The rise after an upward breakout (41.1%) is slightly below the average 
for all chart patterns (42.4%), so even upward breakouts see price struggle. 
Let’s take a tour of this pattern first and crunch the numbers later. 


Tour 


What does an ascending broadening wedge look like? Consider the chart pat- 
tern in Figure 12.1. The first thing to notice is the two sloping trendlines. 
The top line has a slightly steeper slope than the bottom one. ‘Together, the 


Air Express Intl. Corp. (Air Transport, NASDAQ, AEIC) 


i 


| ‘ti 


Jul 92 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 12.1 An ascending broadening wedge has two up-sloping trendlines that 
contain price that broadens over time. 


Tour 177 


two lines diverge but both slope upward. Once price pierces the bottom trend- 
line, it drops rapidly in this example. The chart looks like a long, pie-shaped 
wedge that slopes uphill. The uphill tilt is why it is called an ascending broad- 
ening wedge. Price bounces up and down and is contained by two diverging 
trendlines. 

Figure 12.2 shows a better example of a broadening wedge. Why better? 
Price crosses from down to up plenty of times, and it looks tighter, with the 
swings closer together than in the prior chart. 

Both Figures 12.1 and 12.2 show a similar situation. The chart pattern 
appears at the end of a rising price trend and signals a reversal. Although a 
reversal is not always the case, nor is the chart pattern required to be at the end 
of a rising price trend, both situations occur more often than not. 

Figure 12.2 also shows an interesting pattern that is instrumental in 
identifying the start of a new price trend: the partial rise. Near the end of the 
wedge, after touching the lower trendline, price again moves up but fails to 
touch the top trendline. As price descends, it pierces the lower trendline and 
continues moving down. That’s how partial rises are supposed to work: Price 
should approach, but not come that close to, the top trendline before heading 
back down and making an immediate downward breakout. 

The chart also shows a similar situation that occurs earlier in the price pat- 
tern (shown on the chart as “Failed Partial Rise”), around the start of the year. 
Price has touched the two trendlines at least five times, so it looks like a valid 
and established ascending broadening wedge. Price rises in its attempt to touch 


Barrick Gold (Gold/Silver Mining, NYSE, ABX) 


Partial Rise -15 


Failed Partial Rise 
Pullback -14 


Mh, Late a 


\ |, I i" 


i i \ 


My, i at -11 


Sep 91 Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 12.2. The broadening feature of the wedge is clear in this chart. The 
partial rise and failure to touch the upper trendline is a signal of an impending 
downward breakout. 


178 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 


the top trendline but fails. The trend heads down and forms a partial rise, right 
where you’d expect it to form: at the patterns’ end (as of that date, anyway). If 
the partial rise worked, we should see an immediate downward breakout. 

Oops. It doesn’t happen. Price bounces off the bottom trendline 
and zooms up to touch the upper trendline, forming the tallest peak in 
the pattern. 

Why does a broadening wedge form, anyway? Pretend that you are the 
head of a mutual fund that has big bucks to spend and wants to buy shares in 
another company. When the price is low, you instruct your trading department 
to begin buying. The sudden buying demand forces price to climb even though 
the trading department spreads its orders over several days. 

The trading department tries to keep its buying quiet, but word gets out 
that you are in the market. The momentum players jump on your coattails and 
ride the stock upward by buying, too. This sends the stock higher than you 
expected, so your trading department stops buying for the moment. 

Value investors and swing traders, sensing an overbought situation, are 
willing to sell their shares at the higher price. Soon the stock is moving 
down again. But before it can reach its old low, the buy-the-dip crowd jumps 
in and halts the decline. Your trading department, seeing a higher low form, 
jumps back in and buys while the price is still reasonable. Some new traders 
join the hype and decide the stock is worthy of a trade and add to the buy- 
ing pressure. 

The company itself gets into the act and buys shares authorized by 
the board of directors as a share-buyback program announced long ago. 
The buyback program is nearing the expiration date, and the company feels it 
is the right time to buy to complete their promise to shareholders. 

The stock makes a new high. When it climbs high enough, selling pres- 
sure overwhelms buying demand and sends the shares lower, but the price will 
not drop far—not with everyone trying to buy at a good price. What you have 
then are much higher highs from the unbridled buying enthusiasm and higher, 
but saner, lows as your fund and the company itself tries to buy near a fixed low 
price. You never quite succeed and pay higher and higher prices as the minor 
lows move up. 

Soon, however, the stock is too pricey even for your tastes, so the trading 
department stops buying. Momentum players keep pushing the stock higher 
for a time, but selling pressure eventually takes over and the stock heads down. 

Everyone has an ear to the ground listening, trying to figure out what all 
the excitement is about. In the distance, a rumble sounds. The same-store-sales 
numbers are going to be lower this quarter, the shorts say. The rumor finds 
sympathetic ears. The rumble heard earlier is the stampede of the smart money 
running for the exits. Price drops quickly. It may hover for a bit around support 
zones while novice investors, who have not gotten the word, buy the stock. 
When they finish placing their orders, the meager buying demand abates and 
the stock crashes through the lower trendline and heads down. 


Identification Guidelines 179 


Identification Guidelines 


There are a number of identification guidelines, outlined in Table 12.1, that 
make this formation unique. As I discuss the different guidelines, consider 
the ascending broadening wedge depicted in Figure 12.3. This formation is 


Table 12.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Looks like a megaphone, tilted up, with price action that outlines two 
up-sloping but diverging trendlines. 

Trendlines The top trendline has a steeper upward slope than the lower one and 
neither is horizontal. 


Touches There should be at least five distinct touches (or near touches) of the 
trendlines (three on one side and two on the other). This helps assure 
proper identification. Each touch should be a minor low or minor 
high, not when price slices through the pattern’s trendline. 


Whitespace Select patterns where price crosses the wedge from top to bottom fre- 
quently, filling the whitespace. 
Volume Irregular with a tendency to rise over the length of the chart pattern. Do 
not discard a chart pattern because of an unusual volume trend. 
Breakout The breakout direction is almost random, but it favors a downward 
direction direction slightly more often than upward. 


Fleetwood Enterprises (Manuf. Housing/Rec. Veh., NYSE, FLE) 


Partial Rise 


ty ~ 
i 1"; False Breakout = 
att 


' 
My mien | 
1 i] 


woooerF- NWtUA DAN OO YO 


Nov 91 Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 12.3. A broadening formation fails to continue moving down, requiring 
a redraw of the formation boundaries. The internal partial rise is rare, occurring in 
about 5% of wedges. 


180 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 


different from Figures 12.1 and 12.2 in that it is born from a region of consoli- 
dation. From the beginning of the study in July 1991 (not shown), price moves 
generally horizontally and does not fall much below the 15.38 level. A portion 
of that horizontal move appears in the figure before the start of the wedge. 

The situation changes just before the new year. Price starts moving up on 
23 December. The stock reaches a new high in mid-January but soon moves 
down. At that point, two tentative trendlines connect the highs and lows. 
Although it is too early to form a definitive conclusion, a broadening wedge 
appears to be taking shape. After price moves up and touches the upper trend- 
line, then pulls back to the lower one again, the broadening wedge formation 
is clearly visible. At the start of March, price moves higher but quickly stalls, 
turns around, and pierces the lower trendline. The partial rise and trendline 
penetration suggest a trend change is at hand. 

Price has broken out downward, but it only lasts for 3 days, moving in 
a tight congestion pattern that sees price zoom upward and touch the top 
trendline. If you’re so inclined, redraw the bottom trendline to accommodate 
the slight decline below the old trendline. Clearly, price has more work to do 
before declining below the lower trendline again. 

A month later, price returns to the bottom trendline and moves higher 
for a few days. However, the rise stalls and price pierces the lower trendline. 
Like a replay of the price action a month earlier, price pulls back to the trend- 
line and starts moving higher. However, this rise falters on low volume and 
price quickly returns to the lower trendline. When price gaps down on 16 
April, another breakout (a genuine one this time) occurs. In rapid fashion, 
price plummets to below 12.75, nearly a 50% decline from the high. 

Appearance. Looking back at Figures 12.1, 12.2, and 12.3, there are sev- 
eral characteristics that ascending broadening wedges share. The overall shape 
appears as a megaphone, but this megaphone tilts upward: Both trendlines 
slope higher. The upper trendline has a higher slope than the lower one, giving 
the formation a broadening appearance. 

Trendlines. The two trendlines outlining the wedge diverge, but both 
trendlines tilt upward. 

Touches. In my studies of ascending broadening wedges, I select forma- 
tions that have at least five touches total (three of one trendline and two of the 
other). The five-touch minimum helps identify reliable chart patterns. Each 
touch should be a minor high or minor low. If price cuts through a trendline, 
such as at the start of end of the wedge, it doesn’t count as a valid touch. 

Whitespace. The pattern should have price crossing from top to bottom 
frequently. Avoid patterns with a big chunk of whitespace. 

Volume. The volume pattern is irregular (which is common for long 
patterns) but generally rises as price moves up and recedes as price declines. 
Although it is not clear from the charts, volume tends to rise over time. How- 
ever, an upward volume trend is not a mandatory selection guideline. If volume 
trends down, then that’s fine. 


Focus on Failures 181 


Breakout direction. Figure 12.3 shows a false breakout. Usually, price 
follows the lower trendline and does not penetrate it until the actual breakout. 
When price does break out, the price action can be messy, as shown in the figure. 
Sometimes price runs straight through the lower trendline without pausing, 
and sometimes it weaves around the trendline before finally continuing down. 

Price can break out in any direction but leans toward a downward one. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 12.4 shows what a failure looks like. Although price breaks out down- 
ward from the wedge, the stock fails to continue moving lower. The breakout 
occurs at a price of 50.13 and price drops to a low of 48.63 about 2 weeks later, 
resulting in a 3% decline—too small to register as a success. 

Any breakout move no more than 5% I consider a failure (a 5% failure). 
After a downward breakout, you'll often see price struggle to drop. Maybe it’s 
because price trends upward in the pattern (both trendlines tilt up) so there’s 
buying demand waiting under the stock to keep the uptrend going. A down- 
ward breakout smashes into that buying demand, surprising and overpowering 
the sellers, and price rises. 

Left behind is a meager drop. Of course, that’s not always the case. If fun- 
damentals deteriorate or if a large stockholder wants to dump their position 
(now!), it could send price plummeting. Swing traders and momentum players 
will join the fun and help push price lower. 

However, the numbers suggest that this chart pattern sees price struggle 
to drop. Indeed, 31% fail to see price decline more than 5% after a downward 


Eaton Corp. (Auto Parts (OEM), NYSE, ETN) 


af i I a , = 
VY 2 


56 


il Pullback 
| h hi \ 


7" 


Breakout 


Jul 93 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb Mar 


Figure 12.4 An ascending broadening wedge that fails to continue moving 
down. Price declines less than 5% below the breakout price before moving higher. 


182 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 


Table 12.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 329 361 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 19% R, 81% C 81% R, 19% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 35% R, 42% C -12% R, -13% C 
Average rise or decline 41% -12% 
Standard & Poor's 500 change 11% -2% 
Days to ultimate high or low 232 52 
How many change trend? 54% 21% 


breakout. That’s good news for longer term holders of the stock (like buy-and- 
hold investors). If the decline after an ascending broadening wedge is meager, 
then why worry? 

Let’s look at the numbers to get a better sense of how this pattern behaves. 


Statistics 


Table 12.2 shows general statistics for ascending broadening wedges. 

Number found. I found the first pattern in July 1991 and the most recent 
in July 2019, totaling 767 patterns in 529 stocks. Not all stocks covered the 
entire time. After removing bear market statistics, we have a similar number of 
patterns with up and down breakouts. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Upward breakouts from 
the broadening wedge act as continuation patterns (meaning price trended 
upward into the start of the pattern). Downward breakouts acted as reversals 
most often. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Mapping performance of rever- 
sals and continuations shows that patterns acting as continuations outper- 
formed reversals for both breakout directions. However, performance for 
downward breakouts is about even. 

Average rise or decline. The table shows only bull market statistics, 
so when the breakout goes against the prevailing market trend, performance 
suffers. Thus, it is more profitable to trade with the prevailing market trend 
instead of against it. That means trading upward breakouts in a rising market. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. From the date of the wedge’s breakout 
to the ultimate high or low, I checked the performance of the index. You'll 
notice that the index didn’t fare as well as the chart pattern. 

You might also conclude that the general market helped boost the 
performance of the individual stocks. The boost was higher in bull markets 
(with the index rising 11%, helping to achieve a 41% average chart pattern rise). 


Statistics 183 


Days to ultimate high or low. Upward breakouts took their sweet time 
(about 8 months) rising 41%. Downward breakouts took only about 7 weeks 
to reach the ultimate low. Checking the two velocities, we find that down- 
ward breakouts reach the ultimate low faster than upward breakouts reach the 
ultimate high. 

How many change trend? This measures how many patterns see price 
rise or fall more than 20%. For upward breakouts, I consider a value above 
50% good. Downward breakouts seem to always suffer under this gauge. 

Table 12.3 shows failure rates. How do you make sense of the num- 
bers? Let me share some examples. In bull markets after downward breakouts, 
31% of the patterns failed to see price drop more than 5%. Upward breakouts 
showed half the failure rate: 15%. 

Notice how the failure rates rise quickly as the maximum price rise or 
decline increases. For example, over half the patterns with downward break- 
outs (57%) fail to see price drop more than 10%. Upward breakouts don’t 
reach the 50% threshold until price fails to drop more than 25%. 

Table 12.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction is about random but favors 
a downward breakout. Of course, additional samples might change this. 

Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance of wedges onto 
the yearly price range, we find that upward breakouts with the breakout price 
within a third of the yearly high perform best. Downward breakouts do better 
if the breakout price is near the yearly low. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about 
two-thirds of the time, and it takes the stock between 11 and 12 days to return 
to the breakout price. The move between the breakout and the apex of the 
throwback or pullback isn’t large enough (4% or 5%) to consider a swing trade 
to capture the move. Other chart pattern types see price move farther away 


Table 12.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 50 or 15% 112 or 31% 
10 39 or 27% 94 or 57% 
15 36 or 38% 44 or 69% 
20 26 or 46% 34 or 79% 
25 22 or 53% 27 or 86% 
30 19 or 58% 16 or 91% 
35 8 or 61% 13 or 94% 
50 32 or 71% 19 or 99% 
75 37 or 82% 2 or 100% 


Over 75 60 or 100% 0 or 100% 


184 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 


Table 12.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 48% up 52% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L19%, L-15%, 


12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) M 35%, H 43% M -12%, H -11% 


Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 68% 62% 

Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 4% in 6 days -5% in 5 days 

Average time to throwback/pullback ends 12 days 11 days 

Average rise/decline for patterns with throw- 38% -11% 
backs/pullbacks 

Average rise/decline for patterns without 47% -14% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 

Percentage price resumes trend 80% 55% 

Performance with breakout day gap 32% -16% 

Performance without breakout day gap 43% -12% 

Average gap size $0.32 $0.52 


from the pattern than do wedges. I’d look at those patterns for a throwback or 
pullback swing trade. 

Notice that when throwbacks and pullbacks occur, performance suffers. 
Because the performance difference is wide, you’ll want to avoid nearby 
support or resistance (which might cause a throwback or pullback to happen). 

Gaps. According to the statistics in the table, sometimes a breakout day 
gap helps performance (downward breakouts) and sometimes it hurts (upward 
breakouts). In other chart patterns, we usually see a performance boost if a gap 
occurs, but often the boost is minor. 

Table 12.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Height is an excellent predictor of future performance (taller 
ones do best)—except for this chart pattern, at least for upward breakouts. 
Downward breakouts perform best if the pattern is tall. 

Width. For other chart pattern types, wide patterns outperform narrow 
ones. In this case, narrow patterns with upward breakouts do well and wide 
patterns with downward breakouts show a minor performance improvement. 

Height and width combinations. Tall and narrow patterns outperform. 
Placing last for performance are short and wide patterns. As you would expect, 
narrow patterns with upward breakouts do best and tall patterns with down- 
ward breakouts outperform on average. There’s a large enough swing between 
the various numbers that you might want to confine your trading to tall and 
narrow wedges. 


Statistics 185 


Table 12.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 41% -15% 
Short pattern performance 41% -10% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 14.8% 18.7% 
Narrow pattern performance 43% -12% 
Wide pattern performance 39% -13% 
Median width 55 days 59 days 
Short and narrow performance 42% -10% 
Short and wide performance 39% -9% 
Tall and wide performance 39% -15% 
Tall and narrow performance 45% -16% 
Table 12.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 66% up 67% up 
Rising volume trend performance 41% -12% 
Falling volume trend performance 42% -13% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 39% -12% 
Light breakout volume performance 47% -13% 


Table 12.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends upward as measured from the start of the 
pattern to the end. Does the trend direction matter? Let’s find out: 

Rising/Falling volume. I sorted performance by whether volume was 
rising or falling in the pattern. Patterns with a receding volume trend do 
slightly better but not enough to worry about. 

Breakout day volume. Light breakout day volume sees price move far- 
ther than heavy breakout volume. That finding goes against conventional wis- 
dom. Light volume has only 96 samples (compared to 233 for heavy volume, 
upward breakouts only), so it could be a sample count thing. That means more 
samples might change the results. 

Because of the way I calculate stops, Table 12.7 (how often stops hit) 
does not apply to this chart pattern, so I left it off. 

Table 12.8 shows the performance over three decades. 


186 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 


Table 12.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 42% -15% 
2000s 41% -10% 
2010s 41% -12% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 10% 22% 
2000s 13% 36% 
2010s 22% 42% 
Table 12.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 61 or 19% 151 or 42% 
Single bust count 36 or 59% 125 or 83% 
Double bust count 20 or 33% 5 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 5 or 8% 21 or 14% 
Performance for all busted patterns -13% 41% 
Single busted performance -19% 49% 
Non-busted performance -12% 41% 


Performance over time. Upward breakouts show stable performance 
over the last 30 years. Downward breakouts had their best performance in 
the 1990s and the worst in the 2000s. Bear markets were not included in 
the numbers. 

Failures over time. Both up and down breakouts show an increasing ten- 
dency to fail over time. In other words, failures were lower in the 1990s than in 
the 2000s, and lower in the 2000s than the 2010s. I don’t know the reason for 
this, but I applaud the consistency. 

Table 12.9 shows busted pattern performance. See the Glossary (“Busted 
pattern”) for tips on determining what a bust means, and we’re not talking 
about anatomy or sculpture here. 

Busted patterns count. As one might expect, downward breakouts have 
a substantially higher bust rate than upward breakouts (more than twice as 
often). That’s not a bad thing if you want to go long after a busted downward 
breakout to capture a big rise. 

Busted occurrence. I told my computer to count how often a pattern 
busted (single, double, or more than twice). Single busts happen most often. 
For downward breakouts, triple busts (triple+) come in second for frequency. 


Trading Tactics 187 


That may sound odd, and I think it is, but it’s something we’ve seen in other 
chart pattern types. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Is it better to trade a busted pat- 
tern than a non-busted one? Yes, but only if you can find a single busted pat- 
tern. Comparing all three busted patterns (single, double, and three or more 
busts) to their non-busted counterparts, the results do not show a significant 
performance edge. 

However, if you take pleasure from failure, then wait for a downward 
breakout from a broadening wedge to fail (drop 10% or less) and buy when 
price closes above the top of the chart pattern. There’s a good chance (83%) 
that the pattern will single bust, leaving the clouds as your goal and a gain 
averaging 49%. That’s if you trade it perfectly and frequently. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 12.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule for wedges is different from 
most other chart patterns in that it is based on the lowest low in the pattern 
(for downward breakouts only). As the table shows, price reaches that target 
71% of the time. 


Table 12.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule For downward breakouts, use the lowest price in the wedge as the 
target. For upward breakouts, use the formation height added to the 
breakout price. The bottom portion of the table shows how often the 
measure rule works. 


Partial rise If a stock shows a partial rise and begins to head back toward the lower 
and decline trendline, consider selling short. A downward breakout should imme- 
diately follow a partial rise. For a partial decline, when price begins to 
turn upward, buy the stock and hope an immediate upward breakout 
follows. A partial rise works 60% of the time, and a partial decline 
works 65% of the time. 


Busted trade See Table 12.9. 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern bottom N/A 71% 

Percentage reaching half height target 78% 32% 

Percentage reaching full height target 61% 17% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 43% 5% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 31% 2% 


188 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 


For upward breakouts and other downward targets, I use the height of 
the pattern (or a multiple of it) applied to the top or bottom of the pattern. 

Figure 12.6 shows two ascending broadening wedges and application of 
the measure rule. Both formations are well formed. The chart marks the low- 
est low in each wedge. The low serves as the expected target (the measure rule 
target for downward breakouts). 

The formation on the left shows price reaching the target in mid- 
November just as price turns. The wedge shown on the right has price hitting 
the target soon after the breakout. 

For targets other than the pattern’s low, measure the height from the 
top of the wedge to the bottom of the wedge. For upward breakouts, add the 
height to the top of the wedge. For downward breakouts, subtract the height 
from the low at the start of the pattern. The result will be the target. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often this works. 

You can use other heights (half, two, or three times the height) in the 
computation to get targets closer or farther away. 

Once you have a target, convert the target into a percentage of the 
current price. For example, if the top of the wedge is at 50 and the bottom 
is at 40, the height is 10. If the current price is 50, a climb of 10 would be 
a 20% rise. Table 12.3 says that 46% of wedges will fail to see price rise 
more than 20%. 

If price drops, the target is 40 (bottom of the wedge) and that’s a $10 drop 
from the current price of 50. Again, that’s a 20% drop. In this case, Table 12.3 
says that 79% will fail to see price drop more than 20%. 

Partial rise and decline. With most chart patterns, you’ll want to wait 
for the breakout. An exception to the rule is if a partial rise or decline occurs. 
Figure 12.2 shows a good example of a partial rise. It correctly predicts a down- 
ward breakout. A partial decline works in a similar manner, except price drops 
down from the top trendline, returns, and breaks out upward. See the Glossary 
(“Partial rise” or “Partial decline”) for details. 

Unfortunately, partial rises and declines look like they are taking shape 
during a normal pause that occurs partway across the pattern. Often, I’ll see 
what I believe to be a valid partial rise or decline and wait for the regular 
breakout away. More aggressive traders or those with advanced skills may want 
to trade partial rises and declines to get into trouble sooner. 

Busted trade. If you can tell when a stock will single bust or if you just 
take a chance that it’ll single bust, you can make more money trading the stock 
using a busted pattern. Downward breakouts single bust 83% of the time on 
average, so you’ve a good chance of trading a winner when it (single) busts. 
With the new trend direction being upward, the potential gain is higher than 
for a downward move (as in a downward breakout or a busted upward pattern). 

When price busts the downward breakout by closing above the top of the 
pattern, buy the stock and ride it to heaven. 


Experience 189 


Experience 


Ascending broadening wedges are rare enough that I don’t look for them to 
trade, and their performance isn’t great, either. However, I made one trade in 
Assurant Inc. (AIZ) that I want to tell you about. It uses a wedge. 

I picture the trade in Figure 12.5. The wedge at A has five touches of 
the top trendline and three or four on the bottom. Price crosses the pattern 
enough to fill most of the whitespace. However, there’s a big whitespace area 
between September and November, but that’s because the pattern is so tall, 
it takes time for price to cross from top to bottom. The two trendlines slope 
upward and diverge as you would expect from an ascending broadening wedge. 

I traded this stock by entering it for the first time after the bear market 
ended in 2009 (and sold in 2010). At E is another buy location, so I was familiar 
with this stock. For this trade, I bought at B. 

Here’s my notebook entry: “24 November 2012. This is at the bottom of 
an ascending broadening wedge. I am flush with cash, but have 15% in insur- 
ance co’s. P’Il add more to bring it up to near a [full] investment. Buy at market 
open on Monday. Buying at a good price, at support (chart pattern).” 

Two days later, when the market opened, I bought at the open and 
received a fill at 34.18. 

At you can see, I made a perfect entry, just three days after price bounced 
off the bottom trendline. 

You probably can’t see the price action well enough in the printed figure, 
but the stock did not breakout downward. A downward breakout, as you know, 
requires price to close below the bottom trendline, and that didn’t happen. 
Rather, an upward breakout happened at C. 


Assurant Inc (AIZ) 


12 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan13 Feb Mar = Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan14 Feb — 


Figure 12.5 This ascending broadening wedge trade led to an 87% gain. 


190 Broadening Wedge, Ascending 


This is one of those fire-and-forget-type trades where you just sit back 
and count your winnings. Price took a week or so to gather strength before it 
started to move up after I bought. It retraced a portion of the move and bot- 
tomed at F, but after that, it was a smooth ride to the stars. 

Fast forward to January 2014. The stock peaked a nickel below 69 and 
retraced. The spike down at G was because of earnings. Apparently, the 
market didn’t like the news but recovered to close the session just 6 cents 
below the high. 

That was my wakeup call. On 12 February, I wrote this in my trading 
notebook: “I sold the rest of my shares this morning. The stock has broken 
down through a support area at 64, and it’s trading at 63.42 now. On the weekly 
scale, this is a 2B pattern. It LOOKS as if it’s going to tumble, and since it’s 
above my target price of 56, I did well. Selling on 2B, weakness.” 

A 2B pattern isn’t covered in this book, and looking at the weekly scale, it’s 
not a 2B pattern at all. A 2B happens when price moves above a prior peak and 
then poops out. The stock reverses and moves lower. Think of a narrow double 
top with a slightly higher right peak and you'll know what a 2B looks like. 

In this case, there is no first peak to compare against. However, the note 
about weakness is clear. The stock peaked at almost 69 and was now trading 
at 63. I received a fill at 63.42 for a gain of (drum roll, please) 87% (including 
dividends) with a hold time of 15 months. 

I sold near the bottom of a retrace. The stock climbed back up to 69.26 
and then moved sideways until July 2015. It moved sideways after I sold for 
longer than I was in the trade! 

What did I do wrong? Entry was perfect. The exit was late. The only 
thing I can think of to improve the exit was to use a trendline connecting F, 
H, and I on the log scale (this chart appears to be on the linear scale). I would 
have sold at the open the day after I, at 64.29, a slight improvement. But the 
trendline uses hindsight. A trendline would have taken me out any number of 
times on the way from F to H, because price curves to the right. 


Sample Trade 


“T work the night shift at a bakery a few streets away. I can walk to work, so it’s 
handy. Before I go to sleep, I check my favorite stocks and found an interesting 
one shown in Figure 12.6. Let me tell you about it.” 

Each day before Curtis bedded down, he plotted the stock and watched 
with amusement as the first broadening wedge formed. When the second one 
appeared, he stopped yawning and moved closer to his computer screen. The 
second broadening wedge didn’t excite him; rather, it was the wedge coupled 
with a potential double top. “Together, they looked especially bearish.” 


Sample Trade 191 


Centex Corp. (Homebuilding, NYSE, CTX) 


Double Top 46 
___ Not a Partial -45 
Rise - 44 
ii | 1 k Shorted ~ - 
Hy Stock Shorted - 
. my J -41 
, lm ul! - 40 
i Target Price - 39 
\ ~ 38 
, Lowest Formation -37 


j t | Target Price Low h ae 
| nny tl Lowest Formation » er 
ee 

i | | Low 


i] \ ~ 32 
Covered -31 


Jul 93 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan94 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 12.6 The measure rule as it applies to two ascending broadening wedges. 
Astute investors will recognize the twin peaks as a large double top. 


The day after the stock closed below the lower trendline of the right 
broadening pattern, he sold short and received a fill at 39.50. 

“T used the double top measure rule to estimate my price target.” With a 
top at 45.75 and a valley low of 36.25, the target was 26.75 (that is 45.75 — 36.25 
subtracted from 36.25). 

“T placed an order to cover my short at 27.13, because you always want to 
have protection. I put it just above the whole number and just above where eve- 
ryone else was likely to place theirs. Let them get cashed out first, before me.” 

He went to bed. 

Each day, before he closed the curtains to get some sleep, he checked the 
stock. To him, it was pleasing to see the stock begin moving down immediately 
and sailing below the nearest broadening wedge target (38.88). 

“T lost some sleep worrying about the upward retrace in March, and 
thought the party was over. But I stuck with it.” 

The stock eventually pierced support and kept moving down. “I hoped 
that the congestion region in March was the corrective phase of a measured 
move down. That would place the target at 22.50, well below my target of 
27.13. ’m not stupid, and I’m not greedy, so I left the target where it was.” 

On April 18, a ringing phone woke him. His broker reported that they 
covered the short at his target price. He made about $12 a share. That put a 
smile on his face, and he went back to his dream of telling his boss what he 
could do with the night shift. 


13 


Broadening Wedge, 
Descending 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


il Sep 


Appearance: Price follows two down-sloping trendlines that diverge. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average rise 

Volume trend 
‘Throwbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average drop 

Volume trend 

Pullbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


192 


Long-term bullish reversal 
27 out of 39 

18% 

39% 

Upward 

62% 

83% 


Short-term bearish continuation 
29 out of 36 

35% 

13% 

Upward 

64% 

32% 


Tour 193 


The descending broadening wedge has performance that gravitates 
toward the bottom of the list of chart patterns. However, it does have one 
redeeming quality. Almost half (47%) of downward breakouts will bust, and of 
those, 75% of them will single bust. The average rise for single busted patterns 
is (drum roll, please) 65%. That’s huge. The computation uses 75 samples, and 
the median rise is 44%. Half the patterns will see price rise more than 44%. 
The results are something to look forward to. 

Let’s take a tour, look at the numbers, and see if we can figure out how to 
trade these patterns. 


Tour 


What does the formation look like? Figure 13.1 shows a well-formed descending 
broadening wedge bounded by two trendlines. In September, the stock starts down 
in tight oscillations that broaden over time. A month later, two trendlines drawn 
across the highs and lows make the descending broadening wedge shape clear. 

Volume at the start of the pattern is well below normal. As the wedge 
develops, volume is erratic, but trends higher. Computing the slope of the 
volume line using linear regression confirms the result: Volume is increasing. 
Usually increasing volume helps propel a stock upward. I like to see that in my 
trades as price rises to the ultimate high. 

In mid-October, price gapped up (breakaway gap) and shoots above the 
upper trendline. An upward breakout occurs. Volume spikes and continues to 
be heavy for several days as price climbs. 

Fs 38 
37 
36 
es 


733 


ye a i i i = 
| 


Cognex (Precision Instrument, NASDAQ, CGNX) 


Price Trend 


1 | 
il! ul nt |, 


1 nl 
a! i 


yu 
inert | 


that 


i 1 
Jaret! i 
May 95 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 13.1 This descending broadening wedge acts as a consolidation of the 
upward trend. Two down-sloping trendlines outline price action that broadens 
out. Volume usually increases over time. 


194 Broadening Wedge, Descending 


As you look at the chart, you may make an interesting observation. The 
price trend has three stages: The first stage is the long bull-run to August 
1995, leading to a 2-month retrace (second stage), and then price moves higher 
(third stage). I show those stages in the figure by arrows. 

This broadening formation acts as part of a consolidation or retrace of 
the upward primary trend. Price enters the pattern from below and exits out 
the top. Taken as a whole, it looks like the corrective phase of a measured move 
up chart pattern. 

Contrast Figure 13.1 with Figure 13.2, where a descending broadening 
wedge acts as a reversal of the intermediate-term price trend. Price peaks in 
May 1992 and heads lower. During August, price begins to broaden out as the 
stock continues its downward spiral. By mid-September, a descending broad- 
ening wedge has formed. 

Volume is low at the start of the wedge but does have a few spikes. Into 
September, volume moves up and becomes even more irregular. At the start of 
October, as price begins rising, volume recedes. Price pierces the top trendline 
on negligible volume and heads higher. A trend reversal from down to up occurs. 


Identification Guidelines 
Table 13.1 outlines identification guidelines for the wedge, and Figure 13.3 
shows another example of a descending broadening wedge. 


Appearance. Minor highs align themselves like magnets to iron along 
the top trendline. The trendline slopes downward. Minor lows follow a 


Canandaigua Brands Inc. A (Beverage (Alcoholic), NASDAQ, CBRNA) 


je 


oo, pt 
“ey is 


uw! In ; 
| \ Mt uf My Pf ° 
YP lp ih ii . 


Volume Trend “a. mn : ' 
Aut 


Jan 93 


May 92 Jun 


Figure 13.2 This descending broadening wedge acts as a reversal of the interme- 
diate-term downward trend. 


Identification Guidelines 195 


Table 13.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance The formation looks like a megaphone tilted down. 

Trendlines Both trendlines slope downward, with the lower trendline having a 
steeper slope. Thus, the two lines diverge. 

Touches Wedges require at least five touches, three of one trendline and two of 
the other with each touch being a minor high or minor low. If price 
cuts through a trendline, then it doesn’t count as a touch. 


Whitespace Select patterns where price crosses the wedge from top to bottom 
frequently, filling the whitespace. 
Volume Usually rises over the length of the wedge. However, don’t discard a 
pattern because it has an unusual volume trend. 
Breakout Can be in any direction but breaks out upward most often. 
direction 


Alaska Air Group Inc. (Air Transport, NYSE, ALK) 


rn 
pl | WUT '—— Breakout Occurs Here ! 
\ | oye os 
be tt 1, at 
\ Partial Decline 
Followed by 
Upward Breakout 


| it aaa 
Hy May il fafa 
ugly! 


Sep 95 Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 13.3. This descending broadening wedge is a consolidation pattern in a 
rising trend. Volume increases even as price heads down. A partial decline signals 
that an upward breakout is coming. 


down-sloping trendline along the bottom. Together, the pattern looks like a 
megaphone tilted down. 

Trendlines. The figure shows two down-sloping trendlines that encom- 
pass a series of oscillating waves. The oscillations become more violent, 
swinging up and down in wider and wider arcs, leaving behind diverging 
trendlines. 

Touches. Each valid trendline touch should be a minor high or a minor 
low, or it won’t count as a touch. That means a touch does not count at the start 


196 Broadening Wedge, Descending 


or end of the pattern if price straddles the trendline (if no minor high or low 
appears there). Look for at least five touches, three on one trendline and two on 
the other, but they need not alternate. Use the figures in this chapter as guidance. 

Whitespace. Price should cross the pattern from top to bottom so that 
it covers the whitespace with movement. Too much whitespace in a pattern 
means you’ve probably made an identification mistake. 

Volume. The volume trend is upward two-thirds of the time in descend- 
ing broadening wedges. Increasing volume seems to catapult price higher, 
sending it out the top of the wedge. Volume at the breakout is usually high 
but need not be. As long as demand exceeds supply, price will rise. If volume 
recedes, don’t discard the pattern. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction is upward 72% of the time. 
All of the figures in this chapter show an upward breakout. A downward break- 
out would occur when price closes below the bottom trendline. 


Focus on Failures 


Look at Figure 13.4. In the week or two before the wedge begins, price is ris- 
ing. Immediately after the breakout, price is also rising, so this wedge acts as a 
continuation of the upward price trend. 

The breakout process starts on 3 September when price punches through 
the top trendline and closes above it. However, price does not rise far before 
returning to the trendline. 


United Technology (Diversified Co., NYSE, UTX) 


Breakout ee 

fr -57 

- 56 

Breakaway a 
i Gap 

- 53 

ih, rr as Ae | “31 

i I, Hyplh "ul nly Throwback 7 a 

| “9 

hi | nae 


Jun 92 Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 13.4 This wedge is a failure according to the 5% rule. Price fails to move 
up from the breakout by more than 5% before collapsing. 


Statistics 197 


I have extended the top trendline in the Figure to highlight the throw- 
back. You see that price rides along the top trendline, following it lower until 
it gaps down (a breakaway gap) on 17 September. 

This wedge is an example of what I call a 5% failure, that is, when price 
breaks out and moves no more than 5% before reversing. This type of failure 
is common, happening between 18% (upward breakouts) and 35% (downward 
breakouts) of the time. 

Why these failures occur is unclear. Sometimes nearby overhead resist- 
ance to an upward breakout or underlying support to a downward thrust will 
repulse price and cause a failure. Traders change their minds about a stock and 
bolt for the exits, causing price to move in an unexpected direction. 

If the general market makes a sudden move, such as a large drop, it’ll suck 
the life out of upward breakouts. If news comes out that oil prices have spiked, 
the industry may suffer and that pain gets reflected in the stock. And of course, 
if a cherished CEO gets caught with his hands in the cash register, that may 
cause problems, too. General market, industry, and stock trends all play their 
part in causing a 5% failure. 


Statistics 


Table 13.2 shows general statistics for the descending broadening wedge. 

Number found. I sifted through my databases searching for this pattern 
and found 1,011 from July 1991 to June 2018 in 565 stocks. This is not an easy 
pattern to find, and it’s rare enough that I removed the bear market patterns 
because I found too few. Not all stocks covered the entire period and some no 
longer trade. 

Looking at the numbers, you can see that upward breakouts happen 
most often. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. The table shows that 
upward breakouts act as reversals most often and downward breakouts act as 
continuations. However, the numbers are close to random. 


Table 13.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 542 215 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 58% R, 42% C 44% R, 56% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 38% R, 42% C —13% R, -13% C 
Average rise or decline 39% -13% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 12% -3% 
Days to ultimate high or low 218 54 


How many change trend? 55% 21% 


198 Broadening Wedge, Descending 


Reversal/continuation performance. I sorted wedges by behavior 
(reversals and continuations) and checked performance for each. Downward 
breakouts show no performance difference, but upward breakouts give a slight 
edge to continuations for better performance. 

Average rise or decline. Both the average rise and average decline are 
below what we see for other chart pattern types, so this chart pattern is not one 
you'll want to brag about. However, the next table will discuss failure rates, so 
perhaps we should wait before passing judgment. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. I computed the change in the S&P 
index using the dates when the wedge broke out and reached the ultimate high 
or low. As the table shows, the index didn’t perform as well as the wedges. You 
might also consider that the general market helped wedge performance (a ris- 
ing tide lifts all boats type thing). 

Days to ultimate high or low. I compared the 39% rise in 218 days to 
the 13% decline in 54 days. If the velocity of the two moves were the same, the 
downward move should have taken 73 days. It completed the move in 54 days. 
In other words, the downward move is about 50% faster than the upward one. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many wedges see price 
move more than 20% after the breakout. I consider values above 50% to be respect- 
able. Upward breakouts tie the 55% average for all chart pattern types, so that’s good. 

Downward breakouts in bull markets struggle. The average for all chart 
pattern types is 28%, so wedges fall well short of that value. 

Table 13.3 shows failure rates for this pattern. I counted how many pat- 
terns failed to reach a value, such as 5%. I found that 18% of patterns with 
upward breakouts and 35% of wedges with downward breakouts failed to see 
price move more than 5% after the breakout. Half (51%) couldn’t jump a 25% 
hurdle (upward breakouts). Downward breakouts were worse with the hurdle 
set at 10% and seeing 55% fail to clear it. 


Table 13.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 97 or 18% 75 or 35% 
10 61 or 29% 43 or 55% 
15 47 or 38% 33 or 70% 
20 38 or 45% 18 or 79% 
25 36 or 51% 8 or 82% 
30 29 or 57% 13 or 88% 
35 30 or 62% 9 or 93% 
50 61 or 74% 8 or 96% 
75 66 or 86% 7 or 100% 


Over 75 77 or 100% 1 or 100% 


Statistics 199 


As you look down the rows of this table, the failure rates climb to high 
values quite quickly. Combined with a mediocre average rise or decline, the 
pattern’s overall performance doesn’t bode well for traders using it to make 
money. 

Here’s how this table is useful. Suppose you have a wedge in a bull market 
and an upward breakout. The measure rule says to expect a rise of 10 points to 
the top of the pattern from the current $40 price. That’s a 25% rise. 

According to the table, how many wedges will fail to see price rise more 
than 25%? Answer: 51%. So half the patterns will fail. It might make you 
rethink your expectation of a large rise. 

Table 13.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. Most descending broadening wedges break out 
upward, as the table shows. 

Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance over where the 
breakout price appears in the yearly price range, we find that the pattern per- 
forms best if the breakout is within a third of the yearly low. In second place 
is the highest third. You’ll want to avoid trading patterns in the middle of the 
yearly high-low range (they perform worst). 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Downward breakouts show a return to the 
breakout price a bit more frequently than do patterns with upward breakouts. 
When a throwback or pullback occurs, it takes about 12 days, on average, to 
complete the return to the breakout price. 


Table 13.4 
Breakout and Post Breakout Statistics 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 72% up 28% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L44%, L-15%, 


12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


M 34%, H 42% 


M -11%, H -13% 


Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 62% 64% 

Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 4% in 6 days -5% in 5 days 

Average time to throwback/pullback ends 12 days 12 days 

Average rise/decline for patterns with throw- 39% -12% 
backs/pullbacks 

Average rise/decline for patterns without 39% -15% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 

Percentage price resumes trend 77% 54% 

Performance with breakout day gap 34% 16% 

Performance without breakout day gap 41% 12% 

Average gap size $0.53 $1.16 


200 Broadening Wedge, Descending 


In other chart pattern types, we see performance suffer when a throw- 
back or pullback happens. I think it’s because the curl robs momentum and 
traders become too shy to trade it after the throwback or pullback completes. 
For descending wedges, we see downward breakouts exhibit this performance 
improvement but not upward breakouts. 

After a throwback completes, the stock returns to trending upward 77% 
of the time. Downward breakouts show price resuming their decline 54% of 
the time. That’s about random. 

Gaps. Common trading lore says a breakout day gap helps performance. 
With wedges, it’s a mixed bag. Gaps help after a downward breakout but not 
after an upward one. Notice that the gap size is twice as large after a downward 
breakout. The size of the gap might be related to downward moves having 
higher velocity than upward ones, but that’s a guess. 

Table 13.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns outperform short ones for both breakout direc- 
tions. In fact, height is the best predictor of future performance. Unfortu- 
nately, because we’re dealing with probabilities, we can’t say for sure if a tall 
wedge you’re considering trading will outperform a short one, but on average, 
tall ones perform better. 

‘To determine if a wedge is tall, compute the height from the highest price 
at the pattern’s start to the lowest one at the pattern’s end. Divide the height by 
the breakout price (the price where the stock closes above or below one of the 
trendlines). If the result is higher than that shown in the table for the respec- 
tive breakout direction, then you have a tall pattern. 

Width. Wide patterns generally perform better than narrow ones and 
that’s what we see here. I measured the width of each pattern from start to end 


Table 13.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 44% -16% 
Short pattern performance 35% -11% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 15.9% 13.8% 
Narrow pattern performance 38% -11% 
Wide pattern performance 41% -15% 
Median width 50 days 40 days 
Short and narrow performance 34% -10% 
Short and wide performance 36% -13% 
Tall and wide performance 44% -16% 


Tall and narrow performance 44% -15% 


Statistics 201 


Table 13.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 66% up 66% up 

Rising volume trend performance 36% -14% 

Falling volume trend performance 46% -12% 

Heavy breakout volume performance 42% -13% 

Light breakout volume performance 35% -12% 


in calendar days (not price bars) and compared the result to the median width 
shown in the table. 

Height and width combinations. Combining the traits of height and 
width, we find that tall patterns beat the other combinations. If you select a tall 
pattern, performance doesn’t change much if it’s wide or narrow, but I'd opt 
to trade wide patterns anyway. Remember your pattern might not live up to 
the average, so pick tall and wide patterns for the best potential performance. 

Table 13.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Does a rising or falling volume trend over the life of the 
chart pattern suggest better or worse performance after the breakout? Before I 
answer that, we see that volume trends upward 66% of the time in the descend- 
ing broadening wedge. 

Rising/Falling volume. Performance of wedges is mixed depending on 
the breakout direction. That inconsistency bothers me. Upward breakouts 
show better performance if volume was trending down in the pattern. Down- 
ward breakouts show the reverse with a rising volume trend (within the pat- 
tern, from start to end of it) pushing price higher after the breakout. 

Breakout day volume. Wedges with breakout day volume heavier than 
the prior month’s average show better performance after the breakout. The 
result matches common trading lore. 

I left off Table 13.7 (how often stops hit) because the method to calculate 
stops doesn’t apply to the shape of this pattern. 

Table 13.8 shows the average performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. Upward breakouts show the best performance 
happened in the 2000s, and downward breakouts performed worse then. That 
might be because the 2000s had a whopper of a bull market run in technology 
stocks. Upward breakouts would be pulled along, and downward breakouts 
would fight a rising tide. The two bear markets in the 2000s were excluded 
from the numbers. 

Failures over time. Upward breakouts show failures climbing from the 
1990s to the 2010s. Downward breakouts suffered in the 2010s with almost 
half of wedges failing to see price drop more than 5% after the breakout. That’s 
startlingly bad, and ’'m a writer who doesn’t like using adverbs. 


202 Broadening Wedge, Descending 


Table 13.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 38% -16% 
2000s 42% -11% 
2010s 38% -13% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 14% 27% 
2000s 19% 43% 
2010s 21% 34% 


Table 13.9 shows busted pattern performance. If you’re unfamiliar with 
busted patterns, consult the Glossary (“Busted pattern”). 

Busted patterns count. Downward breakouts bust twice as often as do 
upward breakouts. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted busted patterns into three types (single, 
double, and more than twice). Single busted patterns happen most often, 
which is a blessing because they also perform best. Actually, I didn’t measure 
the individual performance of the other two, so I’m guessing. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I wanted to know if a busted 
pattern performs better than a non-busted one, so I compared them. In 
other pattern types, the results are closer than I expected except for single 
busted patterns. They nearly always beat the non-busted pattern performance. 
We see that trend in this table, too, for wedges. It’s especially true after a down- 
ward busted pattern. Single busted patterns soar an average of 65% compared 
to a rise of just 39% for non-busted patterns. That’s a huge difference. 

There is a catch. The pattern has to single bust and not double or triple+ 
bust. Unfortunately, I haven’t found a way to determine if a pattern will single, 
double, or triple+ bust. 


Table 13.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 116 or 21% 100 or 47% 
Single bust count 61 or 53% 75 or 75% 
Double bust count 36 or 31% 3 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 19 or 16% 22 or 22% 
Performance for all busted patterns -14% 50% 
Single busted performance -22% 65% 


Non-busted performance -13% 39% 


Trading Tactics 203 


Comparing non-busted patterns to all varieties of busted patterns (sin- 
gle, double, triple+), we find that busted patterns outperform non-busted 
ones. Yippee! 

If you see a descending broadening wedge with a busted downward 
breakout, then consider trading it after price closes above the top of the pat- 
tern. Ride price higher. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 13.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. For upward breakouts, the price target is the top 
of the pattern. That sounds like it would be easy to reach, and it is for 83% of 
the patterns. That means 17% never make it up that far before seeing a sub- 
stantial drop. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how effective it is to use the pat- 
tern’s height applied to the breakout price. If you use half the pattern’s height 
added to the top of the pattern, price will reach it 65% of the time after an 
upward breakout. 


Table 13.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule For upward breakouts, use the highest high in the wedge as the 
target. For downward breakouts, use the pattern height subtracted 
from the lowest low in the pattern. The bottom portion of the table 
shows how often this works for both breakout directions (for upward 
breakouts, add the height to the highest high in the pattern). 


Partial rise If a stock shows a partial decline from the top trendline and begins 
and decline to head back up, consider going long. A partial decline correctly 
predicts an upward breakout 79% of the time. A partial rise works 
just 36% of the time to correctly predict a downward breakout. 
Don’t rely on partial rises. 


Busted trade See Table 13.9. Consider trading a wedge after it busts a 
downward breakout. 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 83% N/A 
Percentage reaching half height target 65% 52% 
Percentage reaching full height target 52% 32% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 35% 13% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 25% 6% 


204 Broadening Wedge, Descending 


Subtract the half-height from the bottom of the pattern and just over half 
of the wedges with downward breakouts will reach the target. Ignore values 
below zero and change the decline (or rise) into a percent so you’re not expect- 
ing a huge move. 

Table 13.3 can help you decide if the potential move to the target is real- 
istic. For example, if the target is $5 below the bottom of the wedge with the 
current price of 30, that’s a decline of 5/30 or 17%. Table 13.3 says that 70% 
of wedges will fail to see price drop more than 15% (the closest value to 17%). 
In other words, price probably won’t make it that far down, but your situation 
may be different. 

Partial rises and declines. Figure 13.3 shows an example of a partial 
decline. Price touches the top trendline, then heads toward the lower trend- 
line, curls around, and stages an immediate upward breakout. 

In bull markets, a partial decline correctly predicts an upward breakout 
79% of the time. Partial rises do not work as well: Only 36% correctly predict 
a downward breakout. I wouldn’t rely on partial rises. 

Busted trade. Downward breakouts that bust outperform their non- 
busted counterparts, so consider looking for a busted downward breakout. 
That means waiting for price to bust the downward breakout and going 
long after the stock closes above the top of the wedge (not the top of the upper 
trendline). 

Avoid patterns with nearby overhead resistance. Because this chart pattern 
has poor performance, trade only when the stock, industry, and market are trend- 
ing upward. That way, you are more likely to find a single busted pattern. And 
those blow the doors off performance. Not sure what that means, but it sounds 
way cool. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


D.R. Horton Inc. 


Some trades get away from you like the one in D.R. Horton Inc. (DHI). In 
December 2006, the stock made a descending broadening wedge. It was small, 
but tight, with lots of trendline touches and with the stock bouncing from top 
to bottom, just like you’d expect to see in a well-formed wedge. 

I made the perfect entry, buying into the stock two days after the break- 
out. I could have bought a day sooner and received a better fill, but I snagged 
the opening price of 27.32 and was happy about that. 

From my trading notebook: “18 January 2007. This co’s stock is doing 
twice as well as KBH [KB Home] and I’m flush with cash. It broke out upward 
from a descending broadening wedge, so call that the buy signal.” 


Experience 205 


For a time, the stock cooperated. It did a measured move up type stair- 
step rise and peaked at 31.13, a gain of 14% above my buy price. 

Then the tide left the station, to mix metaphors. Price made a measured 
move down, stair-step pattern, mirroring the upward move except sinking. 
The pause in the middle of the pattern was right where it paused on the way 
up, showing a very pretty mirror of the left side. 

The stock continued a near straight-line run down to 22.02 (for a poten- 
tial loss of 19%). In mid-March, I wrote this in my notebook: “This has com- 
pleted a downward move, from what I can see. The sharp up move starting 
10 November 2006 has been reversed. Review of stock charts says that when 
a decline (not necessarily a quick one) follows a quick rise, price begins rising 
again, recovering the loss and then some. This looks to me to have completed 
the reversal, even though the fundamentals suggest a bumpy road ahead.” 

Buried in my notes was the trap. Did you find it? “. . .price begins rising 
again, recovering the loss and then some.” I did my research and concluded the 
stock would rise. All I had to do was wait and I'd be rewarded. 

The stock moved sideways for 3 months. No big deal. I don’t mind wait- 
ing for my trades to work. 

The stock dropped again in another straight-line run down. Uh-oh. 

I threw in the towel on 27 June 2007. From my notebook: “Sell reason: 
This looks like it’s about to fall off a cliff, and it dropped below a double bot- 
tom low from April. Price will continue down, so I’m selling. . .” 

The double bottom in April looks more like a head-and-shoulders bot- 
tom that started in March. I lost 26% on the trade. Yes, you can laugh now. 
Wait until it happens to you. 

Did the stock fall off a cliff? Yes it did. It dropped to 10.15, a decline of 
49% below the 20 where I sold. 


¢ Lesson: Plan the trade and trade the plan. 


Plan? What plan? I didn’t flush out this trade before I entered it. For a 
few weeks, it looked as if the trade might work out well. But then the trend 
reversed. It appears this was a buy-and-hold mistake, not a planned swing or 
position trade. So I was willing to give the stock room to grow (or shrink, in 
this case). Even after the stock dropped back to 22, it looked like that would 
be the end of the decline because it was resting on support. Indeed, the stock 
moved sideways for 3 months. 

When the stock fell through the ice supporting it, I sold. Perfect entry, 
but a very late exit. 


Texas Industries 


I don’t know if it was too soon to realize we had entered a bear market on 
3 August 2000 (which started on 24 March 2000), but sometimes stocks like to 
go their own way. 


206 Broadening Wedge, Descending 


‘Texas Industries (TXI) formed a large and loose-looking descending 
wedge. The day after it broke out upward, I was there with a fist full of bucks. 
I bought, so it was the perfect entry. 

From my notebook: “Reasons for purchase: It has made an upside break- 
out, on weak volume, from a descending broadening formation. The Fed 
[Federal Reserve] is going to impose antidumping penalties as high as 95.29% 
on imports of certain types of coated-steel sheet. This may help the co. After 
reviewing stats in [this] Encyclopedia book for broadening wedge, descending, 
it looked like a good trade. Upside is 36, downside is 30, evenly split from 33. 
I think this will continue moving higher, maybe to the old high at 43 3/8.” 
I received a fill at 33.06. 

The stock eased a bit lower as if it were making a flag pattern. The drift 
down wasn’t much, but it lasted over a week. Then the stock took off. In 3 days 
it was just 6 cents below 35. And then the stock dropped like a stone all the way 
down to 20.88, a decline of 40%, bottoming in November. 

Fortunately, I pulled a rabbit out of my hat and on 23 August, I sold the 
stock for a profit. From my notebook: “I sold around 33 9/16. I think the stock 
is heading down as it is following the others moving down. All are off their 
peaks by 1 1/2 to 2 1/2 points, and I don’t see a turnaround.” 

I made 1% on the trade on a position about half the normal size. 

Lesson? I’m not sure there is one. I made a perfect entry but a late exit. 
The stock rounded over at the peak and then started heading lower with gusto. 
I sold quickly for a profit and avoided taking a 40% loss. 


Sample Trade 


“Do you feel lucky, punk?” Mary asks as she looks at her computer screen 
(Figure 13.5). She just finished watching a Dirty Harry movie and is feeling ornery. 

She decides to buy the stock when price rebounds off the lower trendline. 
When it is clear the stock is climbing again, she pulls the trigger and receives a fill 
at 43. Immediately, she places a stop-loss order 15 cents below the lower trend- 
line, at a price of 42. If things go wrong, she only will lose 3%. Then she waits. 

The stock cooperates by moving higher each day. Soon it is at the top 
trendline, and she waits for it to ricochet off the line and begin heading down. 

It doesn’t. Instead, price closes above the top trendline, signaling an 
upward breakout. She calculates the price target, 49.63, using the formation 
height added to the breakout price, and that is where she places her sell order. 
“I’m hoping the target is a minimum price move, but it seems a long way away. 
It might be a maximum.” 

She raises her stop-loss point to 44, slightly below the minor low in 
mid-April. 

As the stock advances each day, she keeps wondering why it has not 
paused. She shrugs and does not worry about it. When the stock makes a new 


Sample Trade 207 


Gatx Corp. (Diversified Co., NYSE, GMT) 
nil ] 
i" 1 | -53 
u 1 
yy 
| -51 


| by | 
wll Mh ly | 
Minimum Price | <a) 
Move li i Sold Here | _49 
i | 
t 


| 
| 


ul 


\ |! Bought Here 


Feb 95 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 13.5 As described in the Sample Trade, Mary used the wedge’s height 
projected upward as a price target. 


high at 47.38, she raises her stop to 45.25, slightly below the two minor highs 
in late April and mid-May. 

In a burst of energy, the stock zooms up over a 2-day period and reaches 
her sell target. The stock sells at the high for the day, 49.63. She has cleared 
over $6 a share on her trade. Even better, the stock moves lower for several 
days, reinforcing her sell decision as being the correct one. 

She sold too soon, but she doesn’t care. She spots another promising pat- 
tern in a stock she has been following for quite some time. She leans back in 
her chair, smiles and mumbles something about luck, then runs to the DVD 
player and plugs in another Dirty Harry movie. 

I talked to her about the trade. 

“On the entry, the stock could have continued lower,” she told me, “but 
happened to turn upward at the bottom trendline. It was a risky entry. Balanc- 
ing that was a well-formed wedge.” 

The wedge had several trendline touches and looked long enough to be 
ready to break out upward. 

“T entered just as the stock made a straight-line run higher. It could have 
paused along the way and dropped far enough to hit my stop, especially when 
the stock moved to the top of the wedge.” 

For a swing trade, I’ve found that setting a sell order at the price target 
like she did can get you out of the trade right at or near the high. The stock 
may continue to trend higher as in this case, but you may be surprised how 
often the sell order works better than other exit methods. 


14 


Bump-and-Run 
Reversal, Bottom 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Looks like a frying pan with the handle on the left following a trendline 
down until a large decline ensues. The right side of the pan sees price recover and 


break out upward. 


Upward Breakouts 

Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term Intermediate-term 

bullish reversal bullish reversal 

Performance rank 1 (best) out of 39 2 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 9% 10% 
Average rise 55% 35% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
Throwbacks 61% 69% 
Percentage meeting price target 76% 64% 


More than a year after I discovered the bump-and-run reversal (BARR) 
top, I decided to look for its complement: the BARR bottom. The reason 
was simple. Many chart patterns, such as double tops, ascending triangles, 
and triple tops, have bottom versions. Why not the bump-and-run reversal? 
It never dawned on me to look for the pattern before then. 


208 


Tour 209 


As I searched through the data looking for candidates, I was skeptical 
that the pattern added real value. Some looked like cup-with-handles with the 
handle coming first, whereas others looked like rounding bottoms. Only after 
I compiled the statistics did my thoughts change. 

The pattern is a strong performer with gains averaging between 35% and 
55%, placing the first and second in the performance rank for bull and bear 
markets. The breakeven failure rate is small, too, coming in at 10% or less. 

Grab your magnifying glass and let’s look closer at this pattern. 


Tour 


What is a bump-and-run reversal, anyway? If I had to name this formation 
independent of all others, I would probably call it the frying pan or spoon 
because that is what it looks like. However, the formation is just a BARR 
top flipped upside down, so I call it a BARR bottom. I guess a more accurate 
description is an inverted BARR. 

Why do BARR bottoms occur? Like the top version, the BARR bottom 
is a study of momentum. Consider the chart shown in Figure 14.1 on the 
weekly scale. The last week of October 1993 initiated a long climb to the highs 
of early January 1994. On the highest volume that the stock had seen in years, 
the stock hit a new high of 14.38 during the week of 14 January. Volume began 


CKE Restaurants, Inc. (Restaurant, NYSE, CKR) 


Falling Wedge = 
or Pennant i rl - ie 
Note Pe =) 


hi i -10 
at I, ry I = 
a 


SOHNWANANWO 


933FMAMJ J ASO ND 94EMAMJ J]ASOND95EM AMJ JASOND9I6FMAM |] J 


Figure 14.1 Upward momentum propels price higher during late 1993, then 
stalls at the start of the new year. Volume tapers off and price follows. A rounded 
bottom takes shape and price climbs 350% from the 1995 lows. A channel appears 
in late 1993 and a falling wedge in late 1995. 


210 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


tapering off, although it was still high, and price tagged a much smaller peak 
during the week of 25 March, at 14. The two minor highs, one in mid-January 
and another in late March, formed the basis of a down-sloping trendline. 

As weekly volume trended lower, so did enthusiasm for the stock. 
Eventually, bullish sentiment could not sustain the high price, and the stock 
collapsed. As it headed down, volume continued to taper off. The upward 
momentum experienced during the rise to the highs in January was now 
working against the stock. Over the course of a year, the stock gave back all of 
its gains, and by mid-February 1995, it started sinking to new lows. 

High volume a month later was important because it signaled a turning 
point. A week later, again on high volume, the stock closed higher by over 
10%. The upward move had begun but soon stalled out. The stock moved 
sideways for another 2 months, gathering strength for the uphill run. Then it 
took off, not jumping up, but slowly moving higher, almost week after week. 
When the stock reached the trendline in mid-August 1995, it was clear that 
it had executed a massive rounding bottom—a turn in the trend that signaled 
higher price. 

The stock pushed through the trendline on relatively high volume, then 
paused for a month and formed a falling wedge or pennant. Following that, on 
very high volume, price jumped up to new highs, but this did not last very long 
as the stock entered a consolidation phase below 18. There it stayed for many 
months before the stock jumped up and ran still higher. By late June 1996, the 
stock had touched 28.75, a rise of about 140% from the breakout, and 350% 
from the low. 

Many might think this formation is a cup-with-handle, but it’s too long 
(at 1 year and 9 months). It’s a BARR bottom, because a cup does not depend 
on a down-sloping trendline and a larger handle on the left such as that shown 
in the Figure. Whatever you call the chart pattern, the result is still the same: 
Price moved higher. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 14.1 shows a host of characteristics that correctly identify a BARR 
bottom. Figure 14.2 illustrates the various characteristics outlined in the table. 

Appearance. Overall, the chart pattern appears as a frying pan. The 
handle, or lead-in phase, forms a trendline that slopes downward at an angle 
of about 30 degrees to 45 degrees, more or less. Draw the trendline along the 
high price because the line signals a buying opportunity once pierced. 

Unlike BARR tops, sometimes horizontal trendlines in the lead-in phase 
contain valid BARR bottoms. Such situations are rare, though, and should 
be avoided. The trendlines in this study are higher on the left and slope 
downward—these give the best performance. 


Characteristic 


Identification Guidelines 211 


Table 14.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


Appearance 


Arithmetic scale 


Down-sloping 
top trendline, 
lead-in height 


Bump phase 


Dual bumps 
Uphill run 


Volume 


Breakout direction 


Confirmation 


The formation looks like a frying pan with the handle on the left 
sloping downward to the pan. After a deepening decline that takes 
price into the pan base, price levels out and eventually soars out the 
right side. 


Use the arithmetic chart, not a semilogarithmic one. 


The handle forms a down-sloping trendline that approximates 0-45 
degrees (but this varies with scaling). The handle portion of the 
formation is called the lead-in because it leads into the bump phase. 
The lead-in height measures from the trendline drawn across the 
highs to the low (not necessarily the lowest low) of the 
formation. Select the tallest distance from the trendline to the 
low, measured vertically, in the first quarter of the formation. 

The duration of the lead-in should be at least a month, but varies 
depending on the situation. 


The bump is analogous to the frying pan base. The down-sloping 
trendline deepens to 60 degrees or more. Price drops rapidly, then 
levels out and reverses, usually forming a rounded turn. After the 
turn, price moves up and sometimes pauses at the 30-degree trend- 
line before moving higher. The bump height, as measured from 
the trendline to the lowest low, should be at least twice the lead-in 
height. Strict adherence to this rule is not required, but it serves as 
a good guideline. 


Twelve percent of the time, a BARR bottom has a second cup (bump). 


Once price lifts out of the bump phase, it begins an uphill run that 
carries the stock higher. 


Volume is typically high during the three critical parts of the pattern: 
formation start, bump start, and upward breakout. However, high 
volume is not a prerequisite. 


Upward by definition, when price closes above the down-sloping 
trendline. 


Price must break out upward, or else you don’t have a BARR bottom. 


Arithmetic scale. Use the arithmetic scale, not a semilogarithmic one, 
because the semilog scale distorts vertical distances. 

Down-sloping top trendline, lead-in height. Calculate the lead-in 
height once a trendline forms. Do this by finding the widest distance from 
the trendline to the daily low, measured vertically, in the first quarter of the 


BARR. 


In Figure 14.2, the lead-in height calculation uses price on 16June (point). 
On that day, the low is 17.63 and the trendline has a value of about 20.38. 
Thus, the lead-in height is the difference between these two, or 2.75. The 
minimum bump height uses the lead-in height, so the calculation is important. 


212 = Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


Bethlehem Steel Corp. (Steel (Integrated), NYSE, BS) 
Ho 
Ni |) -23 
Y -22 
ol Lead-in Phase Uphill Run ay 
fl 4! 
yh hy 


a 
hy il yt | 


A 
Bump Phase 
i 


Throwback to 
' {! Trend Line 
’ My, lj 1 


i 
Ml 
a "hh 


May 93 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb Mar 


Figure 14.2 Shown are various components of a bump-and-run reversal bot- 
tom. The lead-in phase sees price moves in a narrow range. The bump forms, 
rounds upward as price leaves the bowl, and moves higher on the uphill run to 
new highs. 


Bump phase. After the lead-in phase comes the bump phase. Price 
declines rapidly, although usually not as rapidly as that shown in Figure 14.2, 
and forms a new trendline that slopes down at about 45 degrees to 60 degrees 
or more. Volume is noticeably higher at the start of the bump, but selling 
pressure overtakes buying demand and the truth finally comes out: There are 
problems with the company. The stock continues down as the smart money 
and the momentum players leave the stock in droves. 

Eventually, downward selling pressure abates, allowing the stock to 
recover. It rounds up and touches the original 30-degree trendline. Here, it 
may move lower for a while or it may sail right through the trendline. Over 
half of the time, price starts moving higher, then throws back to the trendline 
before continuing up. 

Dual bumps. Price touches the trendline on its way to the breakout, but 
instead of continuing higher, it declines and forms a second bump. A second 
bump will appear 12% of the time in bull markets and 11% of the time in bear 
markets. Oddly, patterns with dual bumps perform better. Pll mention that in 
Statistics coming later. 

Uphill run, volume. Volume picks up as price breaks out of the BARR 
and price moves higher. Rising price characterizes the uphill run phase. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. BARR bottoms always break out 
upward. If your pattern sees price close below the bottom of the pattern before 
closing above the down-sloping trendline, then it’s not a valid pattern. 


Focus on Failures 213 


Apple Computer Inc. (Computers & Peripherals, NASDAQ, AAPL) 


| 
lt i Throwback 
a f Hal ht jut B 
il 
3 Bump Phase 


| 
an T | zy 
it al" 


| =35 
ul Mh z= -34 


- 30 
-29 


Jun 95 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb 


Figure 14.3. The bump height is less than twice the lead-in height, a clue that this 
pattern is not worth investing in. A trendline drawn from point A to B (not shown) 
satisfies the bump to lead-in height guideline. An investor waiting for price to move 
above the new trendline would not buy this stock. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 14.3 shows what a BARR bottom failure looks like. Price reaches a new 
high for the year (the highest peak on the left). Then it is downhill from there. 
The decline is quite orderly with peaks that follow the trendline down. During 
early September, however, price drops rapidly on high volume as the bump 
forms. Price quickly reaches a low of 33.63 before rebounding. 

Having sliced through the trendline and moving just a bit higher, price 
throws back and follows the trendline lower. Price following a trendline lower 
is not unusual, but what is unusual is that price does not continue its climb. 
Instead, it drops off the end of the trendline and plummets. By late June, the 
stock slips under $20 a share, less than half what it was at the high. 

Why did the BARR fail? This formation is not a perfect example of a 
BARR bottom, but few patterns are. In this case, the bump height is less than 
twice the lead-in height. However, the height depends on how the trendline 
is drawn. Starting the pattern (drawing the trendline) from the peak at point 
A, the bump to lead-in height is about 2 to 1. The new trendline would also 
touch the peak at B. So, if you wait for price to move above the new trendline 
before investing, you would not purchase this stock. Sometimes it is wise to 
draw alternative views just to see how the chart pattern behaves. 

In the example as I have drawn it, the stock fails because price does not 
rise more than 5% after the breakout. It’s what I call a 5% failure. 


214 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


Table 14.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,099 282 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 52% R, 48% C 67% R, 33% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 52% R, 58% C 34% R, 36% C 
Average rise 55% 35% 
Dual bump average rise 61% 43% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 16% 1% 
Days to ultimate high 326 124 
How many change trend? 67% 59% 
Statistics 


Table 14.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,381 patterns in 642 stocks from July 1991 to 
July 2018. Not all stocks covered the entire time, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. The pattern acts as a rever- 
sal most often, but the numbers are close in bull markets, but much farther 
apart in bear markets. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Patterns acting as continuations 
outperform those acting as reversals. 

Average rise. The average rise is a strong 55% in bull markets and 35% 
in bear markets, handily beating the average rise of 42% and 28%, respectively, 
of other chart pattern types. 

Dual bump average rise. I checked to see if patterns with dual bumps 
worked better than their non-bump counterparts. In bull markets, patterns 
with dual bumps saw price climb 61% versus 54% for those with only one 
bump. In bear markets, dual bump patterns saw price climb an average of 43% 
versus 34% for the non—dual bump variety. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The index did well, but it surprises me 
that it was positive in bear markets. Keep in mind that the measurement peri- 
ods use dates of the BARR’s breakout to ultimate high. Apparently the index 
averaged a small gain during those periods in bear markets. 

Days to ultimate high. To reach a gain of 55% in bull markets, it took 
almost a year. If the rise in bear markets happened at the same speed, it would 
take the average BARR pattern 207 days to climb 35%. In reality, it took just 
124 days. That’s not quite twice as fast, but it’s close. Even though price is moving 
higher in both markets, bear markets show higher velocity than bull markets. 
This finding isn’t related to BARRs. I’ve seen it in other chart patterns, too. 

How many change trend? Here’s where the pattern really shines. I con- 
sider values above 50% to be terrific. This pattern sees more than half of the 


Statistics 215 


Table 14.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 103 or 9% 29 or 10% 
10 90 or 18% 37 or 23% 
15 80 or 25% 30 or 34% 
20 89 or 33% 22 or 42% 
25 72 or 39% 34 or 54% 
30 58 or 45% 25 or 63% 
35 52 or 49% 14 or 68% 
50 149 or 63% 36 or 80% 
75 146 or 76% 32 or 92% 
Over 75 260 or 100% 23 or 100% 


patterns see price climb more than 20% (which is what’s meant by a trend 
change) after the breakout. 

Failure rates appear in Table 14.3, and they show good results. Few pat- 
terns flame out before climbing more than 5%—in bull markets 9% fail, and 
in bear markets 10% fail. That’s low compared to many other chart patterns. 

Look at what happens at the 10% rate, which asks how many patterns 
fail to see price rise more than 10% after an upward breakout? The numbers 
doubled from the prior row: 9% becomes 18% and 10% becomes 23%. 

How do you use this table? Let me give you an example. Say your cost 
of trading is 5% and you want to make a 30% profit for a total of 35%. How 
many patterns will fail to rise more than 35%? Answer: 49% in bull markets 
and 68% in bear markets. Between half and two-thirds of the trades you make 
will fail to meet your goal. That means your winners will have to perform 
dramatically better to compensate for all the losers you should expect to have. 
That’s if you trade the pattern perfectly and hundreds of times, too. You may 
trade the pattern better or worse. 

Table 14.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is always upward. If you 
have a BARR bottom with a downward breakout, then it’s not a BARR bottom. 
It’s a mistake. 

Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance over the yearly 
price range, we find that the best performing BARRs are those with breakouts 
near the yearly high. Those are the ones in which you want to trade. The closer 
the breakout price is to the yearly low, the worse the performance. This finding 
suggests BARR bottoms make for delicious momentum trades (avoid bottom 
fishing BARRs). 

Throwbacks. Over half the patterns throw back. The stocks trend 
upward for about a week before returning to the breakout price in a roundtrip 
time of 11 to 13 days. 


216 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


Table 14.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 100% up 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L 51%, L 33%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) M 54%, H 60% M 35%, H 37% 
Throwbacks occurrence 61% 69% 
Average time to throwback peaks 5% in 7 days 6% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 13 days 11 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 53% 32% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 58% 41% 
Percentage price resumes trend 86% 77% 
Performance with breakout day gap 57% 36% 
Performance without breakout day gap 55% 34% 
Average gap size $0.37 $0.22 
Number of dual bumps 12% 11% 


As with many other chart pattern types, throwbacks hurts performance. 
After a throwback completes, the stock resumes the upward trend a good 
portion of the time (more than 77% of the time). 

Gaps. Gaps help performance in both bull and bear markets. The perfor- 
mance difference is not high, so don’t lose any sleep over it. However, because 
I use the opening price the day after the gap in the measure to the ultimate 
high, you don’t need to own the stock before the gap to participate in the 
better performance. 

Number of dual bumps. A second bump occurs about 11% to 12% of 
the time according to a study I conducted. Figure 14.4 shows a good example 
of a multiple-bump BARR. The first bump completes in mid-August 1993 
when price touches the down-sloping trendline. If you purchased the stock at 
any time during creation of the first bump, you would have been toast. From 
the high of 22.75 on 19 August, the stock declined to 17.38 on 1 October, 
nearly a 25% drop. 

After that, it was all uphill. The stock moved up smartly and crested at 
28.50 in mid-January 1994. From the bump low, that was a 64% move and a 
33% rise from the breakout. 

The figure imparts a valuable lesson: Consider waiting for the upward 
breakout before buying into a BARR. Not surprisingly, this lesson applies to 
many chart pattern types, not just the BARR bottom. 

The dual bump is unusual in that the second bump bottoms lower than 
the first. As mentioned, dual bumps are rare. Of course, that is scant comfort 


Statistics 217 


Inco Ltd (Metals & Mining (Div.), NYSE, N) 
-29 


1 ly 

yal la o> 
i) pea I t" -—27 
|‘ Hee 
-—25 
tt -24 

I" 
- 23 
-—22 
Lod "! i, |! -21 

) ja 

hn, lu ' I - 20 
First Bump \ , _19 
i", 1 -18 
' Second Bump <i 
- 16 
-15 
-14 


-13 
May 93 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb 


i ah, a ‘, 
! ut tar | 


th 


Figure 14.4 Consider waiting to buy the stock until after it breaks out upward. 
A trader buying into this situation during July would have lost money in the 
short term. 


if you already bought into a situation and price begins declining again during 
the second bump. 

Table 14.5 shows size statistics for the BARR bottom pattern. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. To use this informa- 
tion, measure your pattern from the highest high to the lowest low and divide 
by the breakout price (where price closes above the down-sloping trendline). 

Compare the result with the median in the table. If your value is higher 
than the median, then consider your pattern tall; lower than the median means 
it’s short. Trade tall patterns for the best performance. However, also note that 
the performance difference between short and tall isn’t great: three percentage 
points. So if the computation is too difficult for your fingers to handle and you 
don’t want to use your toes, then ignore it. The stock will perform however it 
wants. Your challenge will be to get as much money out of the trade as possible. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones, but only in bear 
markets. I used the median width as the separator between narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. In bear markets, patterns both tall 
and wide should outperform, but they place second. Short and wide wins. 

In both bull and bear markets, the worst performance comes from patterns 
that are short and narrow, so avoid trading those. 

Table 14.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends upward about two-thirds of the time. 

Rising/Falling volume. If volume recedes over the length of the BARR 
bottom, performance improves. I used linear regression to find the slope of the 


218 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


Table 14.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 57% 36% 
Short pattern performance 54% 33% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 27.2% 39.7% 
Narrow pattern performance 55% 30% 
Wide pattern performance 55% 39% 
Median width 100 days 92 days 
Short and narrow performance 53% 28% 
Short and wide performance 56% 43% 
Tall and wide performance 55% 37% 
Tall and narrow performance 61% 35% 
Table 14.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 61% up 66% up 
Rising volume trend performance 52% 34% 
Falling volume trend performance 60% 36% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 55% 36% 
Light breakout volume performance 55% 34% 


volume trend, but sometimes you can tell by using your eyes. Split the pattern 
in half and determine which half has higher volume. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume only helps in bear markets. 

Because of the way I measure stop-loss locations, Table 14.7, “How often 
stops hit,” does not apply. You can look for it, but you won’t find it hidden in 
this chapter. 

Table 14.8 shows the performance of BARRs over three decades. I only 
show bull market statistics because both bear markets occurred in the 2000s. 

Performance over time. Performance has improved over the years. 
Cool beans! 

Failures over time. Recently, the failure rate has turned steady, at about 
7%. Failures are a count of how many BARRs see price fail to rise more than 
5% after the breakout. 

Table 14.9 shows busted pattern performance. 


Trading Tactics 219 


Table 14.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 42% 
2000s 63% 
2010s 66% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 13% 
2000s 6% 
2010s 7% 
Table 14.9 
Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 128 or 12% 28 or 10% 
Single bust count 76 or 59% 25 or 89% 
Double bust count 41 or 32% 3 0r 11% 
Triple+ bust count 11 or 9% 0 or 0% 
Performance for all busted patterns -13% -22% 
Single busted performance -19% -25% 
Non-busted performance N/A N/A 


Busted patterns count. Comparatively few patterns bust because price 
after the breakout tends to keep going up. 

Busted occurrence. I counted the types of busts: single, double, or three 
or more (triple+). Single busts happen most often followed by double and triple 
busts, in that order. This may sound odd, but sometimes triple+ busts happen 
more often than double busts. 

Busted and non-busted performance. | don’t have a non-busted BARR 
bottom with a downward breakout to compare to single and all-busted types. 
Single busted patterns outperform the combination of all three types of busts 
(including single busts). 


Trading Tactics 


Table 14.10 outlines trading tactics for BARR bottoms. 

Measure rule. After properly identifying a BARR bottom, you will 
want to determine how profitable a trade is likely to be. You do that using the 
measure rule, but it’s really a guideline, and it only tells how often price will 
climb to an arbitrary price. 


220 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


Table 14.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule The highest high in the pattern is the target. The bottom portion of 
the table shows how often the measure rule works. See text. 

Wait for Waiting for an upward breakout improves investment performance. 

confirmation The close should be above the down-sloping trendline before you 


buy the stock. 


Sell at old high When price rises to the old high, consider selling if the stock 
shows weakness. 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 76% 64% 
Percentage reaching half height target 57% 32% 
Percentage reaching full height target 46% 17% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 31% 7% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 22% 4% 


The highest high is the measure rule target, and price reaches the high 
64% to 76% of the time. The lower portion of the table shows this (“Pattern 
top”). The remainder of the table shows how often price reaches a multiple of 
the height, from 0.5 to 3 times the pattern’s height. 

For example, in bull markets, price will reach the full height target (the 
pattern’s height added to the top of the pattern) 46% of the time. Notice that I 
use the top of the pattern and not the breakout price in the computation. 

As a sanity check, compute the rise to the target from the current price. 
Let’s say it’s $10 in a stock trading at 60. The height represents a 17% rise 
(10/60). Table 14.3 says that 25% of BARR bottoms will fail to see price rise 
at least 15% (the closes to 17%) in bull markets. That leaves 75% as winners, 
which is reasonable. 

Wait for confirmation. Confirmation happens when price closes above 
the trendline formed during the lead-in phase. Should the price close above 
the trendline, buy the stock. Waiting for an upward breakout prevents a loss 
should the stock break out downward or form a second bump. 

Sell at old high. Place a sell order near the price level of the old high (the 
price at the start of the BARR). That will keep your profits intact should the 
stock then turn down. If you are reluctant to sell your holdings, why not sell 
half when the stock reaches the old high, and then see what happens? 

Figure 14.5 shows an example of the situation I’m writing about. Price 
began the BARR at 32.88 and then formed a descending triangle. (It’s not a 
good triangle because it only has four trendline touches instead of five and too 
much whitespace. Where the bottom trendline cuts through price at the gap 
(at pattern start) doesn’t count because it’s not a minor low.) 


Experience 221 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD) 


Measure Rule 
Sell Point 


Lead-in 


I 
hay | \ 31 
Uphill jl it" - 30 
Run | MI | | -—29 


| | 
Wa, } 
| | | | Bump | | 
Descending 


| Triangle 


| lw 
| ‘ ft a hi ~24 
"I Wp 


Feb 93 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 14.5 This is a bump-and-run reversal that stopped rising within 15% of its 
old highs. 


In June, parts began falling off the semiconductor stock. The breakaway 
gap saw price plummet over $4 to close at 23.75 on 7 June, then continue 
lower, reaching a low in June in the middle of the bump phase. From the low, 
price recovered and moved higher until reaching a high just 25 cents below the 
price at the start of the BARR pattern. Then the stock faded. A sale at the old 
high would have been timely in this example. 


Experience 


As well performing as this pattern is, I have only traded it once, mostly because 
it has so many rules that it’s hard to find. I don’t just see the pattern during the 
stock scans; I have to hunt for it. Figure 14.6 shows the damage. 

The BARR took shape in April 2018 with the lead-in portion of the pat- 
tern (A). The stock formed the bump (B), dropped, and completed the rounded 
turn. Price climbed up to the trendline and backed off, creating a second bump, 
C (a dual-bump BARR). When the stock closed above the trendline, I bought 
at the open the next day, but a position that was about two-thirds the nor- 
mal size (which is typical. If the trade does well, Pll buy more to fill out the 
position). 

There were lots of warning signs in my notebook entry for the trade: 
“7 July 2018: huge insider selling (lots of people) but for small amounts as high 
as 20k shares but most about 3—4k. S&P says strong buy as of 11 May 2018, 


222 = Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


Cognizant Technology Solutions Corp (CTSH) 


Pi A ~ 84 

¥ i. —~ , = 
ire 
me Pe “2 
lay eA yt = 
yy! i ae x | H H 75 
i mit b oh ig | 74 

" i 


G 
18 = Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 14.6 This BARR bottom trade didn’t work as expected. 


medium risk. Credit Suisse says outperform but no report available. All ana- 
lysts are positive on this. Ford says hold, though.” 

This trade was meant as a long-term holding, with resistance at 82 and 
85 and support at 75-77. A stop-loss order was set for 77 or 4.4% below the 
buy price, but as a long-term holding, I didn’t place it. I did note that “Weekly 
scale: Stair-step rise, Elliott wave: stage 5. Yikes!” Danger, danger, Will Robin- 
son (have I dated myself?). 

The industry was moving lower with 6 stocks up and 11 down compared 
to 16/1 (up/down) over the prior 2 months and 11/6 over the prior 6 months. 
My computer screamed at me, “WARNING: THE INDUSTRY IS TREND- 
ING DOWNWARD! You're about to lose money...” 

Did I listen? “Buy reason: BARRb, up bkout. That says it all, in an indus- 
try that’s doing well (9 of 59 [relative strength compared to other industries 
where | is the best performing]).” 

Fast forward to 17 April 2019. “Sell reason: This just looks like it might 
return to the Dec 2018 launch price. It’s not been a good performer for me, so 
I’m dumping the dog. Wells Fargo downgraded the stock today (15th), I think. 
I sold on weakness.” 

The launch price I’m referring to was the drop to F. That’s where the 
stock started its climb to the double top in February and April (H and H). 
I didn’t want to see the stock return to the price at F, so I sold it at E. 

In fact, the stock did drop to the launch price and dropped a bit 
below it, to G. 

As bad as the chart looks, I only lost 10%. About a week after I sold (D, 
the company announced earnings that the market hated. The stock dropped 
and gapped (exhaustion gap) even lower the next day. 


Sample Trade 223 


The entry to this trade was perfect. The exit was late. Between the two, 
the stock made a substantial decline before partially recovering. 

If I had a rule that said sell if a buy-and-hold position drops 20%, then 
my loss would have been double what it was. However, there is a clue to what 
I did wrong, and it appears at J. Price gapped lower (breakaway gap) after the 
announcement of earnings. 

Often with buy-and-hold positions, you’re looking to hold for years, so I 
ignore earnings results. However, earnings came about a month after I bought 
and the market didn’t like it. That announcement set up a price cascade that 
saw the stock drop from the high by 29% (to the low at F). Often I’ll sell after 
poor earnings in my swing trades, but apparently chose to ignore it in this 
buy-and-hold. 


¢ Lesson: Sell quickly if the market doesn’t like an earnings announce- 
ment. Otherwise, it could be months or longer for price to recover. 


Sample Trade 
Perhaps the most interesting way to illustrate trading tactics is by example. 
John is new to investing, and he did not take the time to learn thoroughly about 


BARR bottoms. As he flipped through his stock charts one day, he noticed an 
intriguing situation developing in the stock depicted in Figure 14.7. 


Varity Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, VAT) 


BARR Trend Line 


un tht 


Parallel Trend Lines, Lead-in Height Apart | 


| 

ltt 

Stock Bought | Halle ina | -1 
; i NA y 


font ‘a 7 


May ue 
Manel a 


In, (a! 
i" 


Stock Sold 


Aug 91 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 14.7. A bump-and-run reversal bottom failure in which John invested. He 
finally sold the stock just 2 days before it reached its low. 


224 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


During August, the stock peaked, declined a bit, and then formed a sec- 
ond minor high. As the stock declined from the second high, John drew a 
trendline down connecting them. Soon, he noticed that the stock was descend- 
ing in a sort of channel. He drew a second trendline, parallel to the first that 
connected the lows. 

However, the stock soon pierced through the second trendline and 
moved lower. “I thought I recognized a BARR bottom forming, so I drew a 
third trendline,” parallel to the other two and lead-in height apart. 

“When the stock dipped below the lowest trendline, I thought the decline 
was over. So the next day, I bought 100 shares at 18.25. I was tickled to buy the 
stock a bit below the closing price for the day.” 

For the next week, the stock shot upward and pierced the middle trend- 
line. John called me up. “Trading stocks is an easy game!” he said. “I can’t lose!” 

The stock began consolidating, but he showed no concern. Flat periods 
of trading often follow quick rises. 

When the stock neared the top trendline, John calculated the target price, 
using the old method (using the pattern’s height) instead of the target being 
the highest high in the pattern. He computed the lead-in height by subtracting 
the daily low from the trendline at its tallest part in the first quarter of the pat- 
tern. He used the low of 20 August, at 24, and subtracted this from the trend- 
line value of 26, measured vertically. This left him with a lead-in height of $2. 

John thought that the stock would likely break out at about 21.25, so 
this gave him a target price of 23.25, which is the lead-in height added to the 
breakout price (and not the top of the pattern). 

“If this works as I expect it to, I’ll make more than 25%. Isn’t that terrific?” 

For about a month, the stock moved sideways, but this did not alarm 
him. He even expected the stock to decline a bit and recapture some of its 
quick gains. 

But he was growing impatient. “When is this going to break out upward?” 
he asked. “It’s stuck in a trading range. I know it’s going up, but I want it to go 
higher not tomorrow, not next week, but now!” 

After the stock approached the top trendline and went horizontal, it 
started dropping in November. 

It touched the middle trendline. 

“These things retrace between 38% and 62%.” He grabbed his calculator 
and computed the retrace value. 

The stock reached a high of 21.43 in a straight-line run from the low at 
18, a rise of about 3.50 points. Now the stock was retracing the gains and had 
moved down to 18.75, for a 78% retrace. Clearly, this was out of the realm of 
a simple retrace. 

“Should I be worried? I think the trend has changed, but I expect the 
stock to touch the middle trendline and start recovering.” 

The stock paused for 3 days at the middle trendline before moving lower 
again. It quickly fell below his buy price and headed down. 


Sample Trade 225 


“T know this was supposed to be a short-term trade, but I’m holding onto 
this for the long term. As soon as I get my money back, I’ll sell.” 

The stock moved below the bottom trendline. The easy game was now 
turning into a disaster. 

“T thought about selling right there,” he pointed at 11 December when 
the stock reached 12.75, for a 30% loss. “But this trade is a long-term holding. 
I should expect some weakness.” 

The next day, the stock closed higher, and it gave him renewed hope. 
Indeed, it closed even higher the following day. But the 2-day recovery was an 
illusion and the stock declined again. As it plunged below 12.75, John threw up 
his hands and told his broker to dump the dog. He received a fill at 12.25, the 
low for the day. From the buy price, John lost 35%. 

‘Two days later, the stock bottomed at about 10.75. 

As upset as this made John, the stock was not finished tormenting him. 
He continued to follow it and watched it recover. He extended the BARR 
trendline downward (Figure 14.8, weekly scale) and noticed that a new, larger 
BARR had formed. After suffering through the large bump in December, the 
stock moved higher until it touched the BARR trendline. Then, the stock slid 
along the trendline, following it lower, unable to pierce the resistance. 

During the week of 27 March 1992, the stock closed above the trendline 
for the first time in months. The BARR was complete, and a confirmed break- 
out was occurring. 

Did John buy the stock? No. For several months, he watched its pro- 
gress as it moved higher almost week after week. Disgusted, he quit following 
the stock. 


Varity Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, VAT) 48 


sinyes [M 44 

tt wt ~ 38 

' A a 

f 34 
yey = 


Ty - 28 


th 1 "h 


r 


New, Larger BARR Bottom 


ih it “hah, | 


a Mul 


' -8 
91 SOND92 FMAM J J ASOND93F MAM J J ASOND 94 FM 


Figure 14.8 A bump-and-run reversal bottom on a weekly scale. After the break- 
out, the stock climbed over 350%. 


226 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Bottom 


In April 1994, John took another look at the stock and was surprised to 
see that it continued moving higher. It had just reached a high of 50.13, a climb 
of almost 370%. He grabbed his calculator and realized that his mistake cost 
him over $3,000. 

“What did you do wrong?” I asked him. 

“Several things. I didn’t wait for the BARR to pierce the top [lead-in] 
trendline and move higher. If I had, I would have bought closer to the low, 
saving lots of money. 

“The big mistake was not cutting my losses short. After I bought, I should 
have determined my stop price. When price climbed above the middle trend- 
line, below that support would have been a good place for a stop-loss order.” 
In this case, it would have taken him out of the stock at about 17.88, a small 
decline from the purchase price of 18.25. “Instead, I followed the stock down 
and changed my investment philosophy from a short-term trade to a long- 
term holding.” 


15 


Bump-and-Run 
Reversal, Top 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price rises steadily along a trendline, bumps up, rounds over, and then 
declines through the trendline and continues down. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term 
bearish reversal bearish reversal 

Performance rank 3 out of 36 3 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 14% 7% 
Average decline 17% 24% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
Pullbacks 64% 65% 
Percentage meeting price target 44% 65% 


If you were thinking of buying stock in a company, wouldn’t it be won- 
derful if you knew the purchase price would be less tomorrow? Of course! But 
how do you predict tomorrow’s price? That is the problem I was researching 
when I discovered the bump-and-run reversal top. I was trying to figure out a 
reliable way to determine if tomorrow’s price would be higher or lower than 
today’s and by how much. 


227 


228 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


I tried all sorts of mathematical games to boost the accuracy of the pre- 
diction with only limited success. Then I moved to the visual world. I drew a 
trendline along a stock chart and wondered if I could determine how far price 
would decline below the line. I looked at many stock charts and trendlines try- 
ing to see if there was a relationship between a trendline and the breakdown of 
the trend. That is when I discovered it: the bump-and-run formation—BARF 
for short. I toyed with the idea of leaving the name as is but decided that 
the investment community wouldn’t believe the veracity of the new pattern. 
So, I changed the name to bump-and-run reversal (BARR), a slightly more 
descriptive and palatable acronym. 

The above Results Snapshot shows that the pattern ranks third for per- 
formance in both bull and bear markets where a rank of one is best. That 
means the average decline is better than average. That sentence reminds me of 
the Department of Redundancy Department. One quick note: The “percent- 
age meeting price target” is based on the stock dropping to the low posted at 
the start of the BARR, not on the pattern’s height. 

Let’s take a tour of the pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 15.1 shows a good BARR example. The overall pattern reminds me of 
a mountain range. The foothills at the start of the pattern are low and subdued, 
not venturing too far above the up-sloping plain. Volume at the start of the 
pattern is high but recedes quickly. The mountains rise well above the foothills 
on high volume. Investor enthusiasm continues as price rounds over at the 
top, then diminishes on the far side. When the mountains end, price declines 
sharply and continues down. That is a BARR pattern: Price bumps up, rounds 
over, and runs back down. 

The chart pattern is the visual representation of momentum. The base of 
the pattern follows a trendline that always slopes upward. It signals investors’ 
eagerness to acquire the stock. As each day goes by, investors bid higher to 
reluctant sellers and the price rises. 

Other momentum players eventually notice the rise in the stock’s 
price. Many jump on the bandwagon the day after a surprisingly good earn- 
ings announcement. That’s when the bump begins. Volume spikes upward 
along with the stock’s price. Quickly rising prices entice others to join the 
fray and that in turn sends the stock even higher. As momentum increases, 
price jumps to form a new, higher-sloping trendline. Then things start 
going wrong. 

Supply catches demand. As that happens, the rise slows and the smart 
money turns cautious. Investor enthusiasm wanes, and the war between supply 
and demand turns. The stock rounds over and starts heading down. 


Identification Guidelines 229 


Fieldcrest Cannon Inc (Textile, NYSE, FLD) 


h | a 

I | ‘ | 
| 

Vi P| e 

i (ume 29 


Downhill = 27 
| Run 


yr"! | 31 
i" 


Lead-in 
Phase 


7s ) [Mh 
aR 


ira! 
I 


Bump 
“~ Begins 


| slik 
He lana 
| I | "hat i, 
| 


Trend Line 


Nov 93 Dec Jan 94 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 15.1 Price moved higher along the trendline in the lead-in phase, jumped 
up during the bump phase, and then crashed down through the trendline dur- 
ing the downhill run. Volume at the start of the BARR and again at the start of the 
bump is usually high but tapers off as the bump rounds over. About half the time 
volume picks up where price pierces the trendline. 


When the smart money sees price falling, they sell and the decline picks 
up speed. Downward momentum increases and returns price to the trend- 
line. At this point, buying enthusiasm may increase and send price back up 
for one last try at a new peak. Usually, however, price does not bounce off 
the trendline but continues down. Sometimes there is a pause and some- 
times price just plunges straight through the resistance line, as illustrated in 
Figure 15.1. 

Once price pierces the trendline, volume increases as investors dump the 
stock. This selling alarms more investors, and the downward trend feeds on 
itself. Eventually, after several months of declining price, the selling pressure 
abates and buying enthusiasm halts the downward slide. Price tentatively lev- 
els out and perhaps even rebounds some. Once the cause of the reversal fades 
from memory, price starts rising again and the process begins anew. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 15.1 outlines the various parts of the BARR that are illustrated in 
Figure 15.1. 


230 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


Table 15.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price climbs at the start of the pattern, waving up and down in a nar- 
row range, then price explodes upward and soars to form a signifi- 
cant bump. Price tumbles thereafter. 


Arithmetic scale Do not use a semilogarithmic scale; instead use an arithmetic one. 


Rising trendline —_A trendline connecting the lows rises steadily. Don’t allow any patterns 
with horizontal or near-horizontal trendlines. The trendline usually 
rises at about 30-45 degrees (although this varies with scaling). 
Avoid trendlines that are too steep (over 60 degrees). 


Lead-in phase, The lead-in phase is the section just before price moves up sharply 
lead-in height in the bump phase. Lead-in price should have a high-low range of 
at least $1 (preferably $2 or more), as measured from the highest 
high to the trendline, vertically, during the first quarter of the overall 
pattern length. Minimum lead-in length is 1 month (but be flexible) 
with no maximum value. 


Rounded bump Price rises up (trendline slope is 45-60 degrees or more) on high vol- 
ume usually after a favorable event (unexpectedly good earnings, an 
analyst recommends or upgrades the stock, higher store sales, that 
sort of thing). Price eventually rounds over and declines back to the 
30-degree trendline. The bump must be at least twice the lead-in 
height, measured from highest high to the trendline, vertically. 


Dual bumps A second bump may form after the first bump ends. 


Downhill run After returning to the trendline, price may bounce up and form addi- 
tional bumps or slide along the trendline. Eventually price drops 
through the trendline and continues down. 


Volume Irregular shape but tends to be high at the start of the lead-in phase, 
bump phase, and breakout. 
Breakout Downward, by definition. 
direction 
Confirmation If price does not close below the bottom trendline, then you don’t 


have a valid pattern. 


Appearance. Look for price to rise at the start of the pattern, but the 
high-low range is short compared to the bump phrase. Price rises following 
a trendline. During the bump phase, price forms a tall mountain. After that, 
the stock heads down and continues dropping, plunging through the trendline 
setup during the start of the chart pattern. 

Arithmetic scale. Use the arithmetic scale, not a semilogarithmic one, 
because the semilog scale distorts vertical distance. 

Rising trendlines. In the figure, an up-sloping trendline drawn below 
the lows in the stock extends until it intersects price as it declines in May. Vol- 
ume is high at the start of the pattern, and the price trend is up. That is a key 
consideration: Price must be rising. The trendline should be approximately 30 


Identification Guidelines 231 


degrees, but the degree of slope depends on the scaling used to view the chart. 
If the trendline 1s flat or nearly so, it is not a good BARR candidate. A rising trendline 
shows investor enthusiasm for the stock. However, the trendline should not be 
too steep, either. Steep trendlines (over 60 degrees or so) do not allow enough 
room for the bump to complete properly. 

Lead-in phase, lead-in height. The first part of the pattern, called the 
lead-in phase, leads to the bump phase. The lead-in phase should be at least 1 
month long (but be flexible) and usually falls in the 2- to 3-month range, but 
can be considerably longer. Price oscillates up and down in this phase and has 
a range of at least $1 as measured from the highest high to the trendline (but 
this will vary with the price of the stock). This range, called the lead-in height, 
is calculated using price from the first quarter of the entire chart pattern. 

Figure 15.1, for example, shows that the highest high during the first 
quarter of the pattern occurs on 12 January 1994, at 25.63. The trendline 
directly below this date has a value of about 24.25, giving a lead-in height of 
1.38. The height is important because the minimum bump height and target 
price, calculated later, use this value. A more accurate approach is to use the 
tallest distance from the trendline to the high, which is not necessarily found 
between the highest high and the trendline. Use whatever method makes you 
feel comfortable. 

During the lead-in phase, subdued price action looks as if the stock is 
gathering strength for the bump phase. Price does not move very far away 
from the trendline and usually appears rounded. If you visualize the chart pat- 
tern as a mountain range, the lead-in phase represents the foothills. 

Volume during the lead-in phase is high at the start. Often this is due to 
events that occur just before the BARR begins. Volume drops off until the start 
of the bump, when it suddenly rises. The higher share turnover and buying 
enthusiasm for the stock forces price up. In Figure 15.1, this price rise occurs 
on 17 February and is accompanied by volume that is the highest in half a year. 

Rounded bump. Price jumps up at the bump start and quickly rises from 
a low of 26.50 to a high of 34.38 during late March. Volume remains high 
throughout this period, then quickly tapers off as price rounds over at the 
top. Many times, the top takes on the appearance of a head-and-shoulders 
pattern or a double or triple top. If you recognize any of these patterns on 
your chart, ignore the BARR top formation and obey the implications of the 
individual patterns. 

The bump height, as measured from the highest high to the trendline, 
should be at least twice the lead-in height. In this example, the bump height 
is 8 (that is, 34.38 — 26.38). This is more than twice the lead-in height of 1.38. 

The reason for the minimum two-to-one ratio is arbitrary. The idea is to 
make sure that investor enthusiasm and, hence, momentum are getting car- 
ried away. An up-sloping trendline that turns into a bump with a higher slop- 
ing trendline emphasizes the rising momentum. Sustaining such unbounded 
enthusiasm for too long is difficult, and the stock eventually declines. 


232 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


In Figure 15.1, a decline is exactly what happens. Price rounds over and 
starts heading down. Sometimes the decline is orderly, and sometimes it is 
choppy. In nearly all cases, price returns to the trendline. Once there, the stock 
may do several things. 

Dual bumps. Fairly often price bumps up again, and that is called a 
BARR with a dual bump or a dual BARR. Occasionally, a dual BARR consists 
of several bumps, but the result is still the same. Price eventually falls below 
the trendline. 

Downhill run. Sometimes price slides up along the trendline for a month 
or so before continuing down. At other times, price drops straight through the 
trendline, turns around and climbs again, before ultimately dropping. In a few 
rare cases, price descends from the bump high and never makes it back to the 
trendline before moving higher. These cases commonly appear on weekly or 
monthly price charts. If price fails to close below the trendline, then the BARR 
pattern is invalid. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. The breakout from this pattern is 
downward by definition. If price doesn’t breakout downward, then it isn’t a 
valid BARR top. 


Focus on Failures 


In the weekly chart shown in Figure 15.2, the first BARR on the left shows 
high volume during the initial stages of the bump, as you would expect. The 
bump height to lead-in height ratio looks good (over 2:1), and clearly investor 
enthusiasm is high. However, price continues climbing instead of rounding 
over and heading down. The pattern is not a valid BARR. 

Contrast the failed BARR with the one in the center. The middle BARR 
has a nicely rounded appearance. The volume pattern is what you would 
expect: high at the start, at the start of the bump, and when price crosses the 
trendline. However, price drops below the trendline by just 4%. Any stock 
recovering after dropping no more than 5% below the breakout price is called 
a 5% failure. 

The BARR on the right is a dual BARR. Price nears the trendline in late 
March 1994 (but remains above it in this case, so it’s a flawed example of a dual 
BARR), and then just as quickly climbs again, forming a second peak before 
dropping through the trendline. Often the peak of the second bump is below 
the first. 

On weekly and monthly price charts, you will often see price moving up 
steadily over time. However, without the sharp bump-up of price, the rising 
trend should not be labeled a BARR. The slope of the price trendline should 
rise from about 30 degrees at the start to 60 degrees or higher during the bump 
phase. Your chart’s aspect ratio may make determining the degree of slope 
more difficult. 


Statistics 233 


Caterpillar (Machinery (const/mining), NYSE, CAT) 


aile rt 7 
F as ju! Ht 
il [ut 


5% Failure 


pet 


93 F M A M I | A Ss oO N D 94 ~«O**F M A 


Figure 15.2 A bump-and-run reversal shown on a weekly chart. The potential 
BARR on the left fails as price climbs away instead of moving below the trendline. 
The rounded-appearing center bump-and-run reversal has good volume charac- 
teristics—high volume at the formation start, bump start, and trendline crossing. 
However, price declined below the trendline just 4%. That is called a 5% failure. 
The right bump-and-run reversal is a dual bump-and-run reversal because price 
approached the trendline in March, formed a second peak, and then dropped 
below the trendline. 


‘To reduce the failure rate, wait for price to close below the trendline. 
Waiting boosts the success rate but reduces the profit that you would make if 
you sold near the top. In the Trading Tactics section of this chapter, I'll show 
you how to sell near the top before the decline really begins. That way you can 
keep more of your profit or make even more by shorting. 


Statistics 


Table 15.2 shows general statistics for BARR tops. 

Number found. BARR tops are plentiful. I found the first one in July 
1991 and finished my search in August 2019. During that time, I found 1,766 
in 758 stocks. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Most of the patterns acted 
as reversals of the prevailing price trend, not as continuations. Because we 
know the breakout will be downward from a valid BARR top, the inbound 
price trend for a reversal must be below the pattern. 


234 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


Table 15.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,488 278 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 76% R, 24% C 73% R, 27% C 
Reversal, continuation performance -17% R, -19% C -24% R, -25% C 
Average decline -17% -24% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -1% -12% 
Days to ultimate low 67 54 
How many change trend? 33% 57% 


Reversal/continuation performance. There’s not a big performance 
difference between reversals and continuations as the table shows. 

Average decline. As you would expect, the average decline in bull mar- 
kets (17%) is less than the superb results in bear markets (24%). Both are 
better than the average decline for all chart pattern types, which is why the 
pattern has a good performance rank. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In bull markets, the S&P 500 index 
dropped 1%. I expected to see a rise, so I checked the statistics and they are 
correct. However, BARR tops are a bearish chart pattern. Perhaps price drops 
along with a falling general market, even though the market trend remains 
bullish (bull markets). 

The index in bear markets, with declines averaging 12%, helps pull the 
stocks showing BARR tops lower after downward breakouts. 

Days to ultimate low. It takes about 2 months to reach the ultimate low. 
Notice, however, that the 24% drop in bear markets takes 54 days but a 17% 
drop in bull markets takes 67 days. The bear market decline has a higher veloc- 
ity, but by how much? Answer: The bear market drop is almost twice as fast as 
the one in bull markets. 

How many change trend? It’s rare that bearish chart patterns see price 
drop more than 20%. I consider values above 50% to be good, but that’s for 
upward breakouts. Even so, the bear market with more than half of the pat- 
terns showing declines above 20% speaks to an especially precarious situa- 
tion. If you see a BARR top in a bear market, and have the skills to manage a 
short sale, then consider shorting the stock after a downward breakout. You 
can make a lot of money quickly if you trade it properly. 

Table 15.3 lists failure rates for BARR tops. Failures start small com- 
pared to other chart pattern types, especially in bear markets. As one might 
expect, the failure rates in bear markets are smaller than those in bull markets. 

Half the patterns in bear markets will fail to drop more than 25%. In 
bull markets, the halfway mark passes at 14% (not shown), meaning half the 
patterns will fail to decline more than 14%. Compared to other bearish chart 


Statistics 235 


Table 15.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 202 or 14% 19 or 7% 
10 298 or 34% 34 or 19% 
15 285 or 53% 37 or 32% 
20 214 or 67% 30 or 43% 
25 163 or 78% 41 or 58% 
30 102 or 85% 27 or 68% 
35 73 or 90% 28 or 78% 
50 124 or 98% 43 or 93% 
75 25 or 100% 19 or 100% 
Over 75 2 or 100% 0 or 100% 


patterns, these failure rates are small. However, notice how the failure rates 
climb rapidly when we allow the maximum decline to change from 5% to 10% 
and higher. 

One way to use the table is with the measure rule. Later, in Trading 
Tactics I discuss the rule, but suppose it predicts the decline of a stock from 
$20 to $15 after the breakout. That five-point drop is 25% of the price of a 
$20 stock. How likely is it that price will actually decline that far? Table 15.3 
shows the answer. In bull markets, 78% will fail to drop more than 25%, and 
in bear markets, 58% will fail to make it down that far. Thus, in both markets, 
price is unlikely to reach the target. That’s an average, so your results will vary. 

Table 15.4 shows breakout-related statistics for BARR tops. 

Breakout direction. By definition, BARR tops have downward break- 
outs. A breakout occurs when price closes below the up-sloping trendline at 
the bottom of the pattern. 

Yearly position, performance. Where do the best performing BARR 
tops break out (and I’m not talking about acne)? The star performers have 
breakouts near the yearly low. To put it another way, avoid trading BARR tops 
with breakout prices within a third of the yearly high. They perform worst. 

Pullbacks. A pullback occurs almost two-thirds of the time, and it takes 
about 2 weeks for the stock to return to the breakout price. That means price 
drops for a week, ending 6% to 9% below the breakout before starting the 
return trip (on average). 

Notice that when a pullback happens, performance suffers, and suffers 
dramatically. Once the pullback completes, the stock resumes the downtrend 
over 60% of the time on average. 

Check for underlying support nearby—anything that might send price 
higher. If you short a stock and price heads back up, it may be a temporary 
situation caused by a pullback. Price should return to (or come close to) the 


236 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


Table 15.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-21%, M L-25%, M 

12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) -18%, H-15% -25%, H -21% 
Pullback occurrence 64% 65% 
Average time to pullback bottoms -6% in 7 days -9% in 7 days 
Average time to pullback ends 13 days 14 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -16% -23% 
Average decline for patterns without -20% -27% 

pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 63% 61% 
Performance with breakout day gap -16% -23% 
Performance without breakout day gap -17% -24% 
Average gap size $0.42 $0.59 
Number of dual bumps 18% 21% 


breakout price before resuming its downward move. If price continues higher, 
close out your short position. If price continues down, consider adding to your 
short position or opening a new one. 

Gaps. This is odd: Gaps hurt performance. Trading lore says that a 
breakout day gap helps performance, and we’ve seen that in other chart 
pattern types. Note that the performance difference between gaps and no 
gaps is one percentage point. So the differences are probably not statistically 
significant. 

Number of dual bumps. Sometimes price will bounce off the trendline 
and form another bump. That is what I call a dual bump. Compare Figure 15.3 
with Figure 15.4. The stock in Figure 15.3 has a bump with a rounded appear- 
ance, giving investors plenty of time to sell the stock near the high. 

Figure 15.4 shows a chart pattern with a much narrower peak. Inves- 
tors had only a few days to catch the top before price moved down quickly. 
The chart in Figure 15.4 is also a dual BARR (two or more bumps). There is 
a second, smaller bump just before price heads below the trendline. Dual- or 
multiple-bump BARRs occur 18% to 21% of the time. 

Table 15.5 shows size statistics. 

Height. BARR tops don’t see a big performance difference between tall 
and short patterns. Bull markets do show a difference (two percentage points), 
but the bear market shows the reverse (short patterns doing better). 


Statistics 237 


Magnetek, Inc (Electrical Equipment, NYSE, MAG) 


P - 26 


Oct92 Nov Dec Jan93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 15.3. A bump-and-run reversal with a rounded bump occurs 76% of the 
time on average. The ultimate low reached in October is at a price of 12.25, a 
decline of over 50%. 


Micron Technology (Semiconductor, NYSE, MU) 


First “rN ae 
| l | Second Bump —— 
» i F iN : 
Hy | hs “68 
i 


il an 
ia! ! i 


yh { ! ra 


Feb 95 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 15.4 Shown is a bump-and-run reversal with a pointed-looking first 
bump, leaving investors precious little time to get out of the stock. Many semi- 
conductor stocks showed similar price patterns in late 1995, setting the stage for 
an industry-wide downturn. The ultimate low reached in mid-January 1996 comes 
after a decline of nearly 70%. 


238 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


Table 15.5 
Size Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -18% -24% 
Short pattern performance -16% -25% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 32.0% 32.0% 
Narrow pattern performance -17% -25% 
Wide pattern performance -18% -24% 
Median width 112 days 96 days 
Short and narrow performance -16% -25% 
Short and wide performance -16% -23% 
Tall and wide performance -18% -24% 
Tall and narrow performance -19% -24% 


I computed the difference between the highest high in the pattern and 
the lowest low and then divided the height by the breakout price. Values above 
the median I considered tall; values below the median mean the pattern is 
short. As a general rule, stick to trading tall patterns. 

Width. Again, results are mixed and probably not statistically significant 
anyway. I used the median length as the divider between narrow and wide. 
Because wide patterns tend to do better than narrow ones (as a general rule, in 
other chart pattern types), I would stick to picking wide ones. 

Height and width combinations. In bull markets, tall and narrow 
patterns do well. In bear markets, short and narrow ones outperform. You'll 
want to avoid short and wide ones, though. They show the worst performance 
across bull and bear markets. 

Table 15.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Measured from the start of the pattern to the end, linear 
regression on volume indicates that volume trends upward throughout the 
pattern. Does volume really matter to performance? Let’s take a look. 

Rising/Falling volume. BARRs with falling volume performed better 
than did those with rising volume. That’s especially true in bear markets. 

Breakout day volume. I don’t see a lot of difference in performance for 
breakout day volume. In other words, a volume spike higher than the prior 
30 days doesn’t change performance much (and hurts it in bull markets). 

I don’t show Table 15.7 (how often stops hit) because the way my 
computer calculates the stop location, the results are meaningless for BARRs. 

Table 15.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. Performance doesn’t vary much over the last 30 
years. The 2000s were the worst performers, and the best was during the 2010s. 


Table 15.6 


Volume Statistics 


Statistics 239 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 57% up 60% up 
Rising volume trend performance -16% -23% 
Falling volume trend performance -18% -26% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -17% -24% 
Light breakout volume performance -18% -24% 

Table 15.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -17% 
2000s -16% 
2010s -18% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 12% 
2000s 17% 
2010s 15% 

Table 15.9 

Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 


Busted patterns count 

Single bust count 

Double bust count 

Triple+ bust count 

Performance for all busted patterns 
Single busted performance 
Non-busted performance 


334 or 22% 
288 or 86% 
9 or 3% 

37 or 11% 
48% 

55% 

N/A 


20 or 7% 
14 or 70% 
0 or 0% 

6 or 30% 
22% 

29% 

N/A 


Failures over time. I counted the number of times price failed to drop 
more than 5% after the breakout. The 2000s showed the highest failures, and 


the 1990s had the fewest. 


Table 15.9 shows busted pattern performance. 


Busted patterns count. Comparatively few patterns bust, especially in 


bear markets. 


Busted occurrence. Sorting the bust type into single, double, and more 
than twice (triple+), we see single patterns happen the vast majority of the 


time. Double busts are few. 


240 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


Busted and non-busted performance. I don’t have values for non-busted 
patterns because there is no such pattern. What remains is the comparison of 
single busted patterns to all three types: single, double, and triple+. Single 
busted patterns perform best. I can say that the average rise for all chart pat- 
tern types is 42% in bull markets and 28% in bear markets. So single busted 
patterns perform better than the averages. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 15.10 lists trading tactics for the BARR top. 

Measure rule. Figure 15.5 shows the measure rule in action. You can 
use the bottom of the pattern (at pattern’s start) as the target. The bottom por- 
tion of the table shows how often price drops that far. 

You can also calculate the pattern’s height (or a multiple of it) from high- 
est peak to lowest valley in the pattern and subtract the height from the pat- 
tern’s breakout price. The bottom portion of the table shows the success rate. 
For example, using the full height of the pattern, price will reach the target in 
bull markets just 17% of the time. That’s why the bottom of the pattern is a 
better choice for a nearby target. 


Table 15.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule The bottom of the pattern can be used as a target. Alternatively, com- 
pute the lead-in height (see Table 15.1 for the definition) and subtract 
the height from the breakout price. The bottom portion of the table 
shows how often the measure rule works. 


Warning line Drawn parallel to the trendline and lead-in height above it. The line 
warns that the stock is making a move and is entering the sell zone, 
an area between the warning and sell lines. 


Sell line A second trendline parallel to the warning line and lead-in height above 
it. Consider selling when price touches the sell line, especially if the 
bump is narrow. Delay selling if price continues moving up. Draw 
additional lines parallel to the original trendline and lead-in height 
above the prior line, as needed. When the stock rounds over and 
touches the lower trendline, sell. 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Bottom of pattern 44% 65% 
Percentage reaching half height target 41% 59% 
Percentage reaching full height target 17% 32% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 4% 10% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 1% 3% 


Trading Tactics 241 


Comsat Corp (Telecom. Services, NYSE, CQ) 


Sell Here When Prices 
Move Down and 
Touch the Sell Line 


A Double Top - 33 
Forms After —32 
Meeting Resistance 31 
from the Trend Line 


Double Top -29 


Sell Line 


Predicted 
Minimum Price 
Target 


92FMAM]J] ASOND9I3 FMAM 1] J] ASO ND 94FMAM J] JAS OND 95F M 


Figure 15.5 Shown is a bump-and-run reversal trendline and parallel warning 
and sell lines. There is plenty of time to take profit in this bump-and-run reversal. 
The stock reached a low of 17.50 in December, a 40% decline from the sell point 
in July. Also shown in the July-to-September period is a double top. 


Another method is to calculate the lead-in height by splitting the forma- 
tion along the trendline into four equal parts. In the first quarter of the BARR, 
compute the height from the highest high to the trendline, measured verti- 
cally (or use the tallest distance between the two). Subtract the result from 
where the trendline is pierced, heading down (the breakout). In Figure 15.5, 
the lead-in height is 3.50 (that is, 21.50 — 18). The target price is thus 21.63 
(25.13 — 3.50), reached during the week of the breakout. 

After the breakout, the stock rises back up to meet the trendline before 
resuming its decline (in this example). Since a trendline denotes a resistance 
area when approached from below, it is no surprise price turns away. Price 
forms a double top in the July-to-September period and plunges downward. 

Once you have a target, convert the potential drop into a percentage of 
the current price and compare the results to Table 15.3. For example, the drop 
in the above example is 3.50 and we’ll use the breakout price (25.13) as the 
current price. The 3.50 drop is a decline of 14% (100 x 3.50/25.13). Is 14% 
reasonable? 

In bull markets, according to Table 15.3, 53% will fail to see price drop 
more than 15% (the closest to 14%). About half the trades will see price drop 
more than 15%, and half won’t make it that far. 

Warning and sell lines. As you view your stock charts periodically, some 
stocks will follow trendlines upward. These are the ones to monitor closely. 


242 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


Occasionally, one will begin a rapid climb on high volume and enter the bump 
phase of a BARR top. 

By definition, a BARR is only valid when the bump height, as measured 
from the highest high to the trendline, is at least twice the lead-in height. Two 
lines parallel to the trendline assist in that determination. The first line, called 
the warning line, is lead-in height above the trendline. A second trendline, par- 
allel to the first two and lead-in height above the warning line, is the sell line. 

The warning line serves as a signal that a BARR may be forming. Once 
price moves solidly above the line, consider doing any fundamental or techni- 
cal research on the stock to prepare for a sale. 

By the time price touches the sell line, you should have a firm grasp of the 
company, industry, and market outlook. The sell line is not an automatic sell 
trigger, but it does confirm that a BARR is present. A sell line touch indicates 
that the momentum players have the upper hand. The game could continue 
for several weeks or months before the downhill-run phase sets in, so do not 
be in too much of a rush to sell. Since most bumps (peaks) appear rounded, 
there is ample time to sell the stock. By waiting, you are giving the momentum 
players additional time to push the stock even higher. 

However, there are situations when you will want to sell quickly. If the 
company, industry, or market look dicey, then perhaps it is time to take prof- 
its. You might not be selling at the exact top, but you never go broke taking 
a profit. Also, if the bump does not appear rounded, then consider selling. 
A quick decline often follows a quick rise. 

Figure 15.5 shows the BARR trendline and the parallel warning and sell 
lines, each line lead-in height from the other. The chart is on a weekly scale, 
and it emphasizes the relaxed nature of some BARRs. If you owned the stock 
depicted in the figure and sold it when price pierced the sell line moving down, 
you would not have sold at the top. However, you would have avoided the 40% 
decline that followed. The decline also points out that it can be easy to make 
money on paper, but difficult to keep it. 


Sample Trade 


Jenny is a librarian. Before she goes home at the end of each day, she logs 
onto the Internet and checks her stock portfolio. She did not notice it at first, 
but by mid-September, Jenny spotted a BARR forming in a stock she owned 
(Figure 15.6). She spent an hour searching the Internet for anything she could 
find about the company. She checked the fundamentals, analysts’ recommen- 
dations, insider buying and selling, and anything else she could think of. 

She reviewed the reasons she bought the stock. Using the Peter Lynch 
style of investing—that of buying a stock one is familiar with—held a special 
appeal to her. She liked shopping at the grocery store chain, and the prod- 
ucts they sold were something she could really sink her teeth into. She felt 
comfortable owning the stock. 


Sample Trade 243 


Breakout 
alero 


Winn Dixie Stores Inc (Grocery, NYSE, WIN) 


-42 

-41 

-40 

-39 

— 38 

-37 

— 36 

-35 

— 34 

Sell Lines | - 33 
1 — 32 

Predicted —| -31 

Minimum I -30 

Price Decline * 29 

-28 

an =o7 

-26 

BARR Trend Line 25 
-24 


phy tele 
Jun 92 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 15.6 As described in the Sample Trade, Jenny raised her sell price as the 
stock climbed. Eventually, she sold the stock the day after it pierced a lower sell line. 


Jenny printed out the price chart and examined the BARR in detail. She 
drew the trendline along the bottom, divided the length of it into four equal 
parts, and computed the lead-in height. Then she drew the warning and sell 
lines parallel to the trendline, each separated by the lead-in height. She com- 
puted the target price to which the stock was likely to decline. From the cur- 
rent price of 30, the target price was 23, a decline of almost 25%. Even though 
she still liked the stock, such a large decline made her nervous. 

She looked back through the chart price history and searched for support 
zones so she could better gauge the area where any decline might stop. The first 
support area was in the 23 to 24 zone, where a prior advance had paused. Inter- 
estingly, that was also the predicted target for the stock. If the stock fell below 
support, she noticed a second, more robust support area between 20 and 22. 

What of the possible reward? How high could she expect the stock to 
rise? Long-term price charts were no help as the stock was making new highs 
almost daily. Jenny shrugged because there was no way to determine where the 
rise would stop. Her only guess was that it might pause at 35, 40, or 45, price 
points where investors might decide to sell (round number resistance). Any 
one of those points could point the stock down, she decided. Even the current 
30 level might be the highest price the stock would see. 

After her analysis was complete, she was still confident that the stock held 
promise of additional gains. She decided to hang onto the stock. If the stock 


244 Bump-and-Run Reversal, Top 


declined to the warning line, she would sell it. She placed a stop-loss order at 
27.50, the current value of the warning line. 

During late September and into the start of October, the stock followed 
the sell line upward. On 12 October, the stock jumped up again. After a week or 
so, Jenny was able to draw another sell line parallel to the original BARR trend- 
line that intersected stock price. She decided that should the stock fall to the 
lower sell line, she would dump the stock. She raised her stop-loss order to 31. 

The stock did not return to the lower sell line. 

The stock reached a minor high of 34.38 on 19 October, then retraced 
some of its prior gains. It curled around and reached a low of 32.88 before 
turning around. Jenny printed out another price chart and drew a new trend- 
line. This line had a slope of about 60 degrees. She smiled as the BARR was 
performing exactly as predicted. 

During the first part of December, price pierced the 60-degree trend- 
line when the stock began moving sideways. Jenny suspected that the rise was 
nearly over, but one could never tell for sure until it was too late. She decided 
that should the stock decline below the latest sell line, she would close out 
her position. 

The stock moved up again. A few days after Christmas, the stock reached 
a new high of 39.75 and Jenny was able to draw another sell line. During the 
next 2 weeks, the stock declined to the lower sell line, then rebounded to chal- 
lenge its recent high. On 15 January, the stock peaked at 39.88, a smidgen 
below the 40 resistance number she estimated earlier. 

To Jenny, the day looked like a one-day reversal, but she could not be 
sure. Taken together, the two highest points looked like a double top. The pat- 
tern was a warning, and it made her nervous. 

Less than a week later, the stock declined below the lower sell line. Should 
she sell or hold on for additional gains? She looked back at the profit she had 
made so far and decided not to be greedy. She sold the stock at 36.75 on 22 
January. The next trading day, the stock closed up 1.25 at 38, and she was 
crestfallen. 

She continued to monitor the stock and watched it hesitantly move higher 
over the next 2 weeks. She tried to take solace in the large profit she achieved, 
but it was little comfort in the face of missed gains. Did she sell too soon? On 
23 February, her question was answered when the stock dropped below her sell 
price, heading down. 

Jenny watched the stock drop to 35 and find support at that level. Then, 
it continued moving down. In early April, the stock declined below the original 
trendline and she calculated the minimum target price of 31. This was reached 
within the week and the stock continued falling. 

She turned her attention to other interesting patterns and forgot her 
trade until July 1994. By chance, she pulled up a chart of the company and was 
horrified to see that the stock had declined to a low of about 21, almost a 50% 
decline from the high. 


16 


Butterfly®, Bearish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Looks like a big W with the location of turns governed by Fibonacci ratios. 


Downward Moves 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance rank 4 out of 5 4 out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 27.3% 7.6% 
Average drop -13.0% -20.2% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Point D reversal rate 86% 85% 
See also Bearish bat, bearish butterfly, bearish crab, bearish Gartley 


The bearish butterfly is a Fibonacci-based pattern whose turns are dictated by 
Fibonacci numbers. I measured performance of Fibonacci-based patterns dif- 
ferently than I do other chart pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a 
reversal at the end of the pattern and not an up or down breakout. Therefore, 
the layout of this chapter is different from most other chapters in this book. 

The above Results Snapshot shows a chart pattern that underperforms 
when compared to other Fib patterns. The average drop in bull markets is 
13%, which is below the average drop of 15% for non-Fibonacci-based pat- 
terns. Both measure the drop to the ultimate low, but start from different 
points (Fibonacci patterns use the high at point D, and regular-based patterns 
use the breakout price). 


245 


246 Butterfly®, Bearish 


Bear market patterns perform substantially better, with declines averag- 
ing slightly over 20%, but that’s still short of the 22.2% average decline of 
non-Fibonacci-based patterns. That’s an apples-to-apples comparison, but the 
butterfly was meant to predict a turn at point D and see price drop from there. 

How well does that notion work? One measure shows that price turns 
down at D at least 85% of the time on average. So if you can find this pattern, 
you will know at what price the stock is expected to turn lower. That’s invalu- 
able information. We’ll investigate how far down price is expected to drop in 
the Statistics portion of this chapter. Until then, let’s capture a bearish butter- 
fly and see what it looks like. 


Tour 


Figure 16.1 shows one example of a bearish butterfly chart pattern. After a 
strong move higher, which started in December 2018, price began forming the 
pattern at minor high X. A retrace followed that took price down to the second 
turn, A. Price recovered to B and that location was determined by a Fibonacci 
ratio of leg BA to XA. 

After B, point C was another Fibonacci-based turn found by the retrace 
of leg BC to BA. We’ll discuss that in more detail in the next section. 

Wrapping up the pattern was point D, which used a Fibonacci extension 
of the BC move to find the turn. Price took a while to turn downward, but it 
did when it made a strong move lower to bottom at G. The recovery was quick, 
though, with price ending the day near the top of the price bar at G followed 
by an upward breakout at E. 


Accenture plc (ACN) 


18 Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 16.1 This bearish butterfly is really bullish. Price continues the 
upward trend. 


Identification Guidelines 247 


Volume (F) trended downward as the chart shows, and that’s typical for 
the pattern. 

From a swing trader’s point of view, this butterfly would be difficult to 
profit from by shorting the stock. The drop to G was just too fast. Of course, 
this chart is just one example of a bearish butterfly, but it does serve as a warn- 
ing that making money with this pattern could be more difficult than with 
other Fibonacci-based patterns. 


Let’s dig into the identification guidelines so we can spot butterflies 
in the bush. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 16.1 shows the identification guidelines. Refer to Figure 16.2 for 
another example of a bearish butterfly. I show the butterfly pattern at turns 
XABCD. The stock drops from D like it’s supposed to and makes a strong push 
lower, closing below the bottom of the pattern at E and staging a downward 
breakout. Unfortunately, price drops only 3% to F before beginning to recover. 
The stock wobbles on its way to G, where it busts the downward breakout. 

For swing traders, the move after F isn’t as important as the turn at D and 
the drop that follows. In fact, if you know when a downturn is likely to happen, 
then you can prepare (short the stock, buy protective puts on a long position, 
sell the stock outright, or just cower in the closet, biting your fingernails as 
your position starts losing money). 

Appearance. The bearish butterfly loosely resembles a big W or a dou- 
ble bottom with somewhat tall sides on both ends and a twin bottom that won’t 
share the same price. Some butterflies look like double bottoms, and some, 


Table 16.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic | Discussion 


Appearance Looks like a big W with the location of turns governed by Fibo- 
nacci ratios. 


BA/XA retrace The ratio of BA/XA is .786. 
BC/BA retrace The ratio of BC/BA is one of .382, .5, .618, .707, .786, or .886. 
DC/BC extension The extension of leg DC to BC is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 1.618, 


2, or 2.24. 
DA/XA extension The ratio of DA to XA is 1.27. 
Volume Volume is downward the majority of the time, but this is an observation, 


not a requirement. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for most 
chart patterns. 


248 Butterfly®, Bearish 


Kellogg Co (K) 


Figure 16.2 This bearish butterfly sees price drop from D and stall just below the 
bottom of the pattern. 


like the one in Figure 16.2, resemble an ugly double bottom (that is, a double 
bottom where the right bottom, C, is much higher than the left one, A). 

BA/XA retrace. Locate point B by computing the Fibonacci ratio of leg 
BA to XA. Because this pattern is so complicated, I used the high-low price 
range of the last point (B) in the ratio. For example, X has a high price of 58.81, 
the low at A is 53.14, and the high-low range of B is 57.81 to 56.69. Using the 
high price of B, we get (57.81 — 53.14)/(58.81 — 53.14) or .82. Substituting the 
low price at B in the equation gives a number of .63. Because the range of .63 
to .82 encompasses the target .786 Fibonacci retrace, the location of point B 
qualifies as valid. 

Your software may use other algorithms for pattern recognition, so don’t 
be surprised if your bearish butterflies are different from the ones you see in 
this chapter. 

BC/BA retrace. In a similar manner, I qualify turn C. The ratio is 
governed by leg BC to BA. The high-low range of point C is 57.65 to 55.50. 
The result would be (using the high price at B and the low at C) (57.81 — 55.50)/ 
(58.81 — 53.14) or .495. Using the high at C gives a value of .034. The .034 
to .495 range must span one of the Fibonacci numbers listed in Table 16.1. It 
swallows the .382 value, so point C is fine. 

DC/BC extension. You might think that for point D, I’d use the same 
method as in prior ratios. You’d be correct. The high-low range of point D is 
60.46 to 59.64. The extension uses the high at B, low at C, and the D high-low 
range. That is, (60.46 —55.50)/(57.81 — 55.50) or 2.15. Using the low at D gives 
(59.64 — 55.50)/(57.81 — 55.50) or 1.79. The range of 1.79 to 2.15 includes the 
Fibonacci number 2, so point D is valid, also. 


Focus on Failures 249 


DA/XA extension. I calculate the DA/XA extension differently. In this 
case, I use a 3% window (3% above to 3% below) the price of D to qualify a 
1.27 Fibonacci number. We use the high at D, low at A, and high at X. Thus, 
we get (60.46 — 53.14)/(58.81 — 53.14) or 1.29. The 1.29 value must be within 
3% of 1.27, which it is. This completes the dorking with Fibonacci ratios to 
qualify the pattern as valid. 

Volume. Volume trends downward the majority of the time, as we’ll see 
in Table 16.2. Do not disqualify a bearish butterfly just because volume trends 
upward, unless you feel like it. The volume trend is not a requirement of a valid 
butterfly, just an observation. 

The volume trend in Figure 16.2 is downward (H), as measured between 
points X and D using linear regression. Often you can tell the volume trend 
just by looking at volume. 

Duration. I limited butterfly patterns to six months or less, but that’s an 
arbitrary limit I use for most chart patterns. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 16.3 shows a bearish butterfly at turns XABCD. The butterfly is part 
of a rounded-looking turn (rounded bottom chart pattern), starting from the 
high at H. It’s not a pretty turn because the bottom isn’t as smooth as I like to 
see, but it’s there. Regardless, the butterfly acts as a reversal pattern when it 
appears at the bottom of the turn. 

Price rises to D, completing the pattern, and then turns downward at D, 
just as it’s supposed to. Unfortunately, the drop from the high at D to the low 


Apache Corp. (APA) Head 
Left Shoulder Ny Right Shoulder 103 
shy 4 
Fs 


i 101 


V 99 
we j 97 

H 1 
h Py 95 
} rY 93 

wv! f 
had DF 91 
yt x a fk 


a! | A ghe 

Ar Nie : 
! : A . | hs 
| iit { 75 


Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan14 Feb Mar Apr May Jun = Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 16.3 Price turned down at D but doesn’t drop far when price contin- 
ues rising. 


250 _—sButterfly®, Bearish 


at E measures just 3%. That’s too small for most traders to feel good about 
shorting the stock (but how would they know ahead of time?). 

The stock recovers and breaks out upward at F, staging an upward break- 
out of the butterfly pattern and seeing price soar to a new high. The rounded 
bottom completes and price rises about ten points above the high put in at H. 

The stock forms a very pretty head-and-shoulders top as the chart shows. 
The pattern confirms as valid when price closes below the neckline (the near- 
horizontal line). A pullback at I allows traders a small amount of time to rec- 
ognize the bearishness of the head-and-shoulders top before the drop begins. 

After the pullback ends, down the stock goes, plunging like a cliff diver 
into the October water. 

If I were to short a stock, the drop from I is the kind of bearish move I 
would love to see, not the meager drop from D. 

This bearish butterfly fails because price drops less than or equal to 5% 
from the peak at D. The meager decline is what I call a 5% failure. 

As timely as the bearish head-and-shoulders is, a bullish double bottom 
appears at AC, signaling an upward move. Notice that C is slightly above A. 
You see that kind of behavior near the bottom of rounded turns where price 
reaches bottom and makes a determined push higher only to collapse and 
bottom just above where it started. In other words, that’s the move from A to C. 

Maybe the way to notice a potential butterfly failure is to look at the con- 
text of where the pattern appears. The rounded turn is a bullish chart pattern. 
Of course, there’s no guarantee that the stock would complete the turn and 
continue upward. A rounded turn might form a second peak, opposite H, and 
create a double top when price tumbles. That’s what I would have expected, 
and with a bearish butterfly in the way, I’d assume price would reverse at D. 

If the bearish butterfly appeared a bit higher in the rounded turn, then 
that would have been a distinct warning of an impending decline. As the chart 
shows, that didn’t happen. A check of the fundamentals (news, like earnings 
announcements) might shed some light on why the stock continued its march 
upward from the low at C. 

So there you have it. This bearish butterfly fails to see price make a sus- 
tained turn lower at D, disappointing traders who may have shorted the stock 
near the D peak. 


Statistics 


Table 16.2 shows general statistics for the bearish butterfly. 

Number found. I found 1,230 bearish butterflies in my home office. 
That came from 662 stocks with patterns found between August 1991 and 
August 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire range. And yes, that includes 
stocks that no longer trade (I know you’ve been wondering about that). 


Trading Tactics 251 


Table 16.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,013 217 
Breakeven failure rate 27.3% 7.6% 
Average decline after D -13.0% -20.2% 
Volume trend 62% Downward 58% Downward 
Performance Up/Down volume -14% U, -12% D -20% U, -21% D 


Breakeven failure rate. The failure rate counts how many butterflies fail 
to see price drop more than 5% below the peak at D. 

In bull markets, the breakeven failure rate is an impressive 27.3%. Wow. 
Compare that to the 7.6% rate for bear markets. I suggest you avoid trading 
this pattern in bull markets unless you have special sauce you can add to the 
stew to get this pattern to be more palatable to your portfolio. 

Average decline. The numbers in the table say that for the best perfor- 
mance trading this pattern stick to bear markets. However, both bull and bear 
market numbers fall short of what non-Fibonacci patterns average. 

Volume trend, performance. I used linear regression to determine the 
slope of volume and found it trends downward most often. The numbers are 
just above random. Even so, the performance benefit isn’t much and you have 
to pay attention to the volume slope (upward in bull markets and downward 
in bear markets). 


Trading Tactics 


Some of the numbers already discussed compare the performance of the bear- 
ish butterfly with regular non-Fibonacci-based chart patterns. However, the 
focus for this pattern is really with the swing trader. They seek to short the 
stock at the end of the pattern (or sell a long holding). Here are some statistics 
that help define the performance at and after D. 

Table 16.3 shows how price behaves after a bearish butterfly completes, 
using numbers, too! Isn’t this exciting? 

How often does price turn at D? One of the tenets of this pattern 
is that price will turn downward at D. The statistics in the table prove 
that’s true nearly all of the time. A new question arises: How far does price 
drop after D? 

How many drop to point. . . ? I used the pattern’s turns and tabulated 
how often price reached those turns. For example, I found that price dropped 
to point C between 38% (bull market) and 44% (bear market) of the time. 


252 __Butterfly®, Bearish 


Table 16.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price turn at D? 86% 85% 
How many drop to point A? 24% 34% 
How many drop to point B? 76% 83% 
How many drop to point C? 38% 44% 


Hopefully, you can use these locations to help gauge where price will turn 
upward and give you a clue when to close out a trade (short sale) or maybe 
enter a new one (long side). 

Before making a trade using this chart pattern, we see from Table 16.2 
that the average decline in bull markets is 13%. You might compare that to 
the location in your butterfly to see where it matches with the XABC turns 
(measure 13% down from the peak at D). Then use Table 16.3 to look at the 
probability of the stock dropping to that turn. You’ll have to make an evalua- 
tion if the reward is worth the risk of a trade. 


Sample Trade 
Figure 16.4 shows a trade Susan made using a bearish butterfly. 


Accenture pic (ACN) K 


Jan10 Feb Mar Apr May Jun jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan11 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 16.4 Susan decided to trade this bearish butterfly. 


Sample Trade 253 


The butterfly is at XABCD on the chart. She didn’t care to short the 
stock at D. She’s not that experienced, and the profit potential wasn’t appealing 
to her anyway. How did she weigh the profit potential? She used Table 16.3 as 
guidance and suspected price wouldn’t make it down to A (just 24% do). 

She watched the stock drop from D to break out downward at E and 
coast lower to F. The stock bounced and made a second low, a higher low, in 
late August. 

Then it was off to the races when price climbed and reached G. Why was 
G important? I asked her. “Because the drop from A [the bottom of the but- 
terfly] to F was less than 10%. A close above the top of the pattern at G busted 
the downward breakout. Busted patterns can produce outsized gains. But only 
if Mars is in alignment and it’s a full moon.” She reached over and rested her 
hand on my arm. “I’m just kidding about that last part.” 

Susan bought the stock a day after G and received a fill at the opening 
price of 39.82. 

She didn’t have a target in mind. Rather, she wanted to make as much as 
possible on the trade, preferring to let the stock speak to her. It would let her 
know when it was time to get out. I know, that didn’t make a lot of sense to me, 
either, but when she started talking about astrology and the alignment of the 
planets, I tuned her out. 

The stock really didn’t cooperate at the start. It rounded over and retraced, 
but that was typical for a stair-step move higher. It didn’t frighten her out of 
the stock. She had hoped that the continuation (or breakaway) gap shown a few 
days before G would provide support. And it did. 

“Whew!” she told me. “I put a stop at 36.63, below the gap.” On the chart, 
I show at H the little nubbin under which she tucked her stop. 

Once the retrace finished, the stock started moving higher again, leaving 
behind a pattern called an inverted and ascending scallop (the arc at H). 

Price continued higher, forming another scallop at I, and then a third 
at J. She recalled reading in one of my books about scallops, how as they 
appear higher in the price chart, they tend to get shorter and narrower. When 
three stack up showing those traits (in the same uptrend), a trend change is 
more likely. 

For grins, she computed the retrace of each scallop and found that the 
first one measured 38% (H), scallop I came in at 47%, and J was at 48%. In 
other words, price was retracing more each time the scallop appeared higher 
in the price chart. That was additional evidence that price was going to reverse. 

Did it reverse? Not immediately. Price was a firework rising from L to 
K in a straight-line run-up. Then it began backtracking. Despite the run-up, 
she expected the stock to turn lower, based on the three-scallop pattern signal- 
ing an end of the upward run. Plus, Mars was in alignment with Las Vegas or 
something. 


254 __Butterfly®, Bearish 


She set a retrace of 50% (of the L to K rise) as her exit price. She rea- 
soned that if the stock really wanted to climb again, it would turn higher before 
retracing 50%. 

She placed a sell order at 52.75 and that filled at M. On the trade, she 
bought at 39.82, sold at 52.75, and made almost $13 a share or 32%. If she 
traded the busted butterfly perfectly, she would have bought at 39.51 (a penny 
above D), and sold at the high, 57.32 (K), for a gain of 45%. 

She called me on the phone and yelled, “Party time! I get along great with 
Capricorns. Let’s go.” 

I asked, “Mom, is that you?” 


17 


Butterfly®, Bullish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A five-turn pattern governed by Fibonacci ratios, often looking like 
a big M. 


Upward Moves 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance rank 2 out of 5 5 (worst) out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 11.4% 2.6% 
Average rise 39.5% 27.8% 
Volume trend Downward Upward 
Point D reversal rate 91% 88% 
See also Big M, double tops, bullish crab, bullish bat, Gartley 


The bullish butterfly is a Fibonacci-based pattern that depends on price 
turning upward at the end of the pattern. Fibonacci-based patterns are ideal 
for swing traders who make money in the short term as price rollercoasters. 

I measured performance of Fib patterns differently than I do other chart 
pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at the end of the pat- 
tern and not an up or down breakout. Therefore, the layout of this chapter is 
different from most other chapters in this book. 

When compared to other non-Fibonacci-based patterns, the above 
Results Snapshot shows below-average performance for the move after turn 
D. Failure rates are lower, though, including the delicious 2.6% rate of those 


255 


256 _—Butterfly®, Bullish 


failing to see price rise more than 5%. That’s exceptionally low (ranking in 
first place, by the way). It suggests price forms a trend long enough for swing 
traders to make a profit. 

Let’s take a tour to see what the pattern looks like. 


Tour 


Figure 17.1 illustrates a good example of what a bullish butterfly looks like 
and how it’s supposed to behave. I show the butterfly as points XABCD. Price 
begins a downtrend at F that leads to the start of the butterfly at X. Price 
bounces up to A in a short move higher, drops just as fast down to B, retraces 
a portion of the AB move on the way to C, and completes the pattern at D. 
Volume (E) trends upward in this example. 

What I find odd about this butterfly is how compact it looks. Usually the 
turns are more spread out, but not this time. It’s as if the bulls and bears were 
yanking each other around for control of the stock. 

Price bottomed at D and then took off, rising in short order to G. That 
wasn’t the ultimate high, though. The stock found the ultimate high in June 
2014 at a price of almost 27 for a potential gain of 50% above the low at D. 

If you were a swing trader and butterfly catcher, you had just a few days 
to buy into the stock after the D bottom before price zipped higher. If you’d 
planned to sell at the top of the pattern (A), you’d have missed out on a nice 
and fast move to G. 

Let’s learn how to find bullish butterflies without going to the zoo. 


Assured Guaranty Ltd. (AGO) 


\ 


{ \ hi A me yA = 
(VM, ots Mm ¥ ih 2 
\ f Vik | \, 


jl 
Uy | il 


MV i “\ 


13. Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 14 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 17.1 This bullish butterfly leads to a fast recovery. 


Identification Guidelines 257 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 17.1 shows identification guidelines for the bullish butterfly. Refer to 
Figure 17.2 as I walk you through how my software identifies the patterns. 
This butterfly (shown as turns XABCD) breaks out downward at F when price 
closes below the bottom of the pattern. However, a swing trader wouldn’t 
worry about that. They would be timing the entry at D and riding the stock 
upward, trying to capture as much of the rise to G as possible. 


Table 17.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic | Discussion 


Appearance Five turns are governed by Fibonacci ratios. 
AB/AX retrace The Fibonacci ratio should be .786. 
CB/AB retrace The ratio should be one of the Fibonacci numbers: .382, .5, .618, .707, 


.786, or .886. 

CD/CB extension The extension of leg CD to CB is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 1.618, 
2, or 2.24. 

AD/AX retrace The ratio of AD to AX is 1.27. 

Volume Volume is downward the majority of the time, but this is an observation, 


not a requirement. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for 
many chart patterns. 


Evolent Health, Inc (EVH) A 


11 


10 
18 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 17.2 This bullish butterfly is at XABCD and has a downward breakout, but 
the rise after D is still decent for a swing trade. 


258 __ Butterfly®, Bullish 


Appearance. A perfectly looking bullish butterfly might remind you of a 
creature with two wings, the first wing being highlighted by lines connecting 
turns XAB (and back to X) and the second wing by lines connecting BCDB. They 
join a body at B. However, in the real world, you'll see some mutant butterflies. 

The various turns in the bullish butterfly are governed by Fibonacci 
ratios. Let’s go through each one to show how I find them. 

AB/AX retrace. I use the ratio of the various turns to see if the result is 
near a Fibonacci number. In these computations, I use the high-low value of 
the last point. You’ll see what I mean. 

The low price at X is 19.40, the high at A is 29.05, and the high-low range at 
B is 22.19 to 20.94. The AB/AX ratio becomes, using the low at B, (29.05 — 20.94)/ 
(29.05 — 19.40) or .84. Using the high at B, we get (29.05 — 22.19)/(29.05 — 19.40) 
or .71. The span of .71 to .84 encompasses the .786 target Fibonacci number 
(from Table 17.1), so B is a proper turning point for the pattern. 

CB/AB retrace. Similarly, I find the CB retrace of AB, using the high— 
low range of C (26.96 to 25.62) and the high at A, low at B. Plugging the high 
at C into the equation, we find (26.96 — 20.94)/(29.05 — 20.94) or .742. Using 
the low at C, we get (25.62 — 20.94)/(29.05 — 20.94) or .577. The range .577 to 
.742 must span at least one of the numbers listed in Table 17.1. Two numbers 
qualify, .618 and .707, so turn ABC qualifies as valid. 

CD/CB extension. I find the extension the same way, using the high— 
low range of the last point (point D in this case). D has a high price of 18.47 
and a low of 17.01. Plugging in the numbers gives a span of 1.41 to 1.65. The 
1.618 number squeezes into the range, so we found point D. 

AD/AX retrace. Because Fibonacci-based patterns are so complicated, I use 
the high-low range as discussed to qualify the turn, except for AD/AX. For this 
ratio, I use a 3% window. I use the high at A, low at D, and low at X in the formula, 
which gives a value of 1.25, which is within 3% of 1.27. Thus, we have a valid bull- 
ish butterfly whose turns come close to the Fibonacci numbers listed in the table. 

Volume. We’ll have a report on volume later in the Statistics section, but 
volume trends downward most often as measured from the start of the pattern 
(X) to the end (D). That’s in bear markets. The volume trend in bull markets 
is about random. 

Duration. I limited patterns to 6 months or less, but that’s an arbi- 
trary limit. 

In this example, the stock climbed after turn D, as predicted, but only 
made it up to G before reversing. We’ll discuss statistics later to see if we can 
better gauge how far price might climb after the pattern ends. Stay tuned. 


Focus on Failures 
Figure 17.3 shows a bullish butterfly with its five turns, XABCD as shown. 


In a violent reversal at F, the stock formed a needle-sharp V-top chart pat- 
tern and plummeted to find footing at X, the start of the butterfly. Price, in a 


Focus on Failures 259 


American Electric Power AEP (AEP) 


‘ 
A ; 

; win ar iy! Wx 

ay } y Why a il M " 
nent Ha | : 


05 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan06 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 17.3 This bullish butterfly fails to see price turn higher after D. 


series of undulating waves, climbed to A before another selloff ensued. That 
selling carried price down to B. Another recovery and selloff dropped the 
stock to D. 

Swing traders wishing to participate in the recovery may have bought 
during the week after D. They had plenty of time as the stock slid sideways 
and made a nice tight knot of support. Volume, not shown, moved sideways 
from X to D, with no outstanding peaks that would hurt the feet of anyone 
stepping on it. 

The key to the failure of this pattern is what happened at D. I didn’t check 
for news, but when the stock broke downward through support, that was the 
exit signal for those who bought at D and hoped to see price climb. 

The plunge to E was a straight-line affair that had an even faster recovery 
(back up to the price of D). The support at D, now resistance, repelled the 
stock and forced it back down. It took two more tries to break through the 
ceiling set up by that knot of resistance. 

Those who bought at D in anticipation of a rise were disappointed. Per- 
haps you heard their screams when they sold for a loss. If they’d held on, they 
would have been rewarded when the stock began its recovery in May. 

Unfortunately, being rewarded for breaking the rules is one of the strug- 
gles newbie traders have to overcome. If they broke their own rules and held 
on as price dropped, only to be rewarded during the recovery, they might be 
tempted to hold on too long the next time. And that’s how a bad habit forms, 
one that will drain their wallet or purse as sure as the sun rises the next day, 
when the stock drops and stays down. 

The utility stock climbed to 48 in 2007 before the bear market came 
along and delivered a knockout punch to stockholders. 

Returning to the turn at D, fortunately this type of behavior for many 
Fibonacci-based patterns is rare. Price does turn upward at D, nearly all of the 


260 _—Butterfly®, Bullish 


time. For the bullish butterfly, that means at least 88% of the time. Accompa- 
nied by a low failure rate, capturing the upward move from a bullish butterfly 
might be a good tool for swing traders to have in their toolbox. 

Let’s crunch the numbers and see what they reveal about the behavior of 
bullish butterflies. 


Statistics 


Table 17.2 shows general statistics for the bullish butterfly. 

Number found. I found few patterns, a total of 882 (in both bull and 
bear markets). I dug them up in 601 stocks from July 1991 to June 2019. Not 
all stocks covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Breakeven failure rate. The failure rates for the bullish butterflies are 
low, especially in bear markets. Why the failure rate is so low is a mystery. The 
bear market should be sucking price lower even as price climbs upward after 
turn D. You’d think that a count of patterns failing to gain more than 5% of 
altitude would be high, but it’s not. 

A check of the spreadsheet shows everything in order. There were 152 
patterns involved in the computation, which is short of the 173 bear market 
samples. That’s because the remainder didn’t turn upward at D (they contin- 
ued lower) and so are not counted. Perhaps the dearth of samples is the reason 
for the low failure rate. 

Average rise after D. The table shows the average rise as measured from 
the low at D to the ultimate high. The ultimate high is the highest high before 
price tumbles by 20% or before the stock closes below the low at D. 

Even though the numbers are below average compared to non-Fibonacci 
chart patterns, they are high enough for short-term-minded swing traders. 

Volume trend, performance. In bull markets, the volume trend is about 
random. In bear markets, the pattern has an upward volume trend. That’s a bit 
odd because most chart patterns see volume recede. 

Bull market performance is probably not statistically significant, but the 
bear market numbers show a wide performance difference. Samples are few, 
77 for up volume and 75 for down, giving a six-percentage-point performance 


Table 17.2 
General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 709 173 
Breakeven failure rate 11.4% 2.6% 
Average rise after D 39.5% 27.8% 
Volume trend 52% Downward 65% Upward 


Performance Up/Down volume 40% U, 39% D 31% U, 25% D 


Sample Trade 261 


Table 17.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price turn at D? 91% 88% 
How many rise to point A? 39% 15% 
How many rise to point B? 79% 69% 
How many rise to point C? 49% 31% 


spread between 31% and 25%. In short, in bear markets, look for upward- 
trending volume for the best performance. 


Trading Tactics 


A bullish butterfly is for swing traders who can use the Fibonacci ratios to 
calculate the price where turn D will appear. Then they can wait to buy when 
the turn is in place. After that, all they have to do is sit back and collect their 
money as it tumbles in. Okay, so it’s not really that easy. How easy is it? The 
following may answer that question. 

Table 17.3 describes the behavior after the pattern ends. 

How often does price turn at D? If price doesn’t reliably turn at D, then 
traders are wasting their time chasing butterflies. However, the bullish butter- 
fly doesn’t disappoint. The average stock will turn upward at D at least 88% of 
the time. However, once they turn, how far does price rise? 

How many rise to. . . I mapped the rise for each butterfly and compared 
it to turns A, B, and C. For example, I found that for those making the turn at 
D, the stock climbed to A 39% of the time in bull markets and 15% of the time 
in bear markets. Point A, as you will recall, is at the top of the butterfly. 

In bear markets, you’d expect the stock to struggle to reach the top of 
the pattern. In bull markets, with the market current pulling the stock upward, 
price is more than twice as likely to reach A than in bear markets. The remain- 
der of the table shows how often price rises to the other turns. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 17.4 shows a trade Mary made using a bullish butterfly. The pattern’s 
turns are labeled XABCD, as you might expect. Her pattern-finding software 
found the pattern for her within a week after turn D. 

Volume trended downward (E) throughout the pattern, but the trend 
wasn’t significant to performance in bull markets. 


262 Butterfly®, Bullish 


All State Corp (ALL) 


Mh 
A G! i 51 


4 at why fl t | 
: Fi In, 1 4 I it 48 
ft! a ' ‘ nit 


we a 


| 


my 40 
f 39 


98 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 17.4 Mary traded this bullish butterfly for a quick 12% profit. 


“I did my homework on the stock and liked what I found.” At FE, she 
bought at the open and received a fill at 45.19. 

The stock cooperated and didn’t just move higher, it became a rocket. 
Price day after day formed higher highs and higher lows. 

When the stock reached the top of the pattern, she knew it might stall 
there and form what’s called a 2B pattern (it’s not covered in this edition). A 
2B pattern happens when price makes a new high but fails to follow through, 
meaning price doesn’t rise far above a prior peak before reversing. If price 
drops far enough, it'll form a double or triple top. At other times, price will 
retrace a bit and then try for another high. 

In this case, with the stock moving up so fast, she placed a trailing stop 
a penny below the prior day’s low. After three consecutive days of higher 
highs and higher lows, the technique is a good method to exit near the end of 
an uptrend. 

At line G, when price reached the high of A, she starting using the trailing 
stop. It took her out of the stock on the day the stock peaked, H, but her stop 
was at 50.62 (a penny below the prior day’s low). On the trade she made $5.43 
a share for a 12% gain in 10 days. On an annualized basis, that’s over 400%. 

“Very nice,” she said. “To celebrate,” she told me, “you can buy me dinner.” 


18 


Cloudbanks 


(Months) 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Years of overhead resistance form a flat base followed by a significant 
decline. 


Upward Breakouts 


Bull and Bear Markets 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish reversal 
Performance rank None 
Breakeven failure rate 0% 
Average rise 386% 
Percentage meeting price target 86% 
See also Diving board 


*This is measured on the monthly scale from the lowest low to the lower of the bottom of the 
cloudbank or as high as the stock has recovered so far. 


This chapter has a different format than other chapters in this book 
due to the nature of the cloudbank pattern. Cloudbanks are best for people 
who buy-and-hold for years, not for shorter-term swing traders who enjoy 
being stopped out (that is, who use stops). Because a monthly scale is used to 
measure performance for cloudbanks, I do not provide a rank (rank for other 
chart patterns is based on the daily scale, so any comparison is an apples-and- 
oranges thing). 

How many times have you switched to the monthly scale and searched 
for chart patterns? You'll see some of your favorite patterns on the longer 


263 


264 Cloudbanks 


term scale: double tops and bottoms, a few triangles, and maybe this pattern: 
a cloudbank. If you like to invest, it might be a pattern worth finding. It’s one 
of my favorites. 


Tour 


Figure 18.1 shows what a cloudbank looks like, shown on the monthly scale. 
The base of the cloud forms from 2003 to 2008, although the actual price 
trend isn’t as flat as the horizontal line indicates. Indeed, price wobbles up and 
down during the period, yet there’s a horizontal component to that movement 
as price slides sideways. That sideways move is what you’re looking for when 
searching for cloudbanks. 

After price starts dropping in the bear market, it tunnels through sup- 
port and down it goes, following the rest of the market lower. This stock held 
up better than the market indices. The bear market started in October 2007, 
and this stock held on until September 2008 before the plunge really started. 
Both the stock and the general market bottomed in March 2009 when the bear 
market ended. 

A recovery began, following the start of a bull market. In this example, 
the rise was swift, taking the stock back into the clouds just four months after 
bottoming. The stock bottomed at 40.87 and reached the cloud base of 67.05 
for a gain of 64%. That’s a nice recovery. If you only captured half that, the 
gain would still be a nice prize. 


3M Company (MMM) 
254 
aie: 
J Tap 82 
! 179 
Hh yt ae 
yl | | i 
y 129 
I i 
i 109 
ly, yf My Aye a = 

| 1 ! | 
feradplly iP : 

Hythe | 

i yf with Cloudbank \ | | ae 64 
| i! | ? \ i 
ly | oy | ° 
39 


2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 


Figure 18.1 A cloudbank lasts for years until the 2007-2009 bear market takes 
price down. 


Identification Guidelines 265 


Such large gains are typical for cloudbanks, which is why I like them. The 
average rise is 386%. Now that’s tasty! Unfortunately, it measures from the 
lowest low to the bottom of the cloudbank (a perfect trade) or to the highest 
high until the end of data. The huge gain suggests there’s money to be made 
trading clouds if you’re willing to hold on and tolerate the risk. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 18.1 shows the identification guidelines for cloudbanks. Refer to 
Figure 18.2 as I discuss them. 

Appearance. Use the figures in this chapter as guidance, but you’re look- 
ing for price to slide sideways for years before a steep plunge. 

Scale. Finding cloudbanks on the historical scale is easy. Switch to the 
monthly chart to locate them. Figure 18.2 shows two cloudbanks, A and D. 
Notice that each price bar represents a month, so there are 12 bars to a year. 
This scale allows you to find these long patterns, which often stretch for sev- 
eral years before the big drop happens. 

Cloudbank. Cloudbank A has a nice rounded top, like traders build a geo- 
desic dome. The bottom of the pattern rests on support, which I show as a hor- 
izontal line. This example looks compact and tidy, but consider cloudbank D. 


Table 18.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A layer of resistance often years long precedes a significant decline. The 
pattern looks like a bank of storm clouds looming far above price. 


Scale Use the monthly scale to find cloudbanks because these patterns often 
last for years. 


Cloudbank Look for a sideways move that’s years long (a common support area). 
The top of the cloud can be uneven, and the bottom can have lots of 
gaps where price doesn’t touch a horizontal line. 


Plunge Look for a minimum drop of 40%. The larger the drop, the higher the 
potential for a rewarding profit. Often this drop is swift (but still last- 
ing several months), a straight-line drop down. After such a straight 
plunge, look for a swift, V-shaped recovery. In a bear market, expect 
the bottom to be 60% to 70% below the cloudbank. 


Events Check company news to see if any significant events are responsible for 
the stock’s drop. Is it a one-time event or more systemic? This applies 
mostly to cloudbanks outside of bear markets. 


Bear market Many cloudbanks appear before and during a bear market. 


Recovery Recovery should occur at the start of a bull market (if you can tell when 
that is). Watch other stocks to see if the market is starting to move 
higher, discounting bad news and perking up on good news. 


266 Cloudbanks 


Abercrombie and Fitch Co. (ANF) 


yn 
li i A 


| 
i | | ; l 
i Uh N | ( | 


My i 


Ff | A ; : 


\ ! 
| \ 


8 
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 


i | : 
M: 


re 14 


Figure 18.2 Two cloudbanks appear on this chart (A and D), with the first one 
leading to the 2007-2009 bear market. 


The shape of the cloud is irregular and more typical of the cloud pattern. Price 
rests on support, shown by horizontal line D. Clearly D is not an ideal example. 

Consider the cloud base as the normal price of the stock. The big plunge 
that happens after the cloud represents an anomaly. The cause might be a bear 
market, or it might be something else (like disappointing earnings). You want 
to be sure (as much as you can, anyway) that the stock will recover back to the 
cloudbank. If the cause is a bear market, then a bull market should turn things 
around and support the stock as price recovers. 

Plunge. The stock makes a large drop (bottoms at B, E, and G). The 
drop is often swift, taking price down substantially. I use a 40% minimum drop 
because I want to make a large gain on the recovery. I discard clouds with 
drops less than 40%. 

Look at the drop from A to B. In the 2007-2009 bear market, price takes 
about half a year before it hits bottom at B. Then it takes over two years to 
recover to the base of the cloudbank (C). 

After cloudbank D, the stock bottoms at E and returns to F. I don’t con- 
sider E to be the bottom of this pattern, even though it represents a drop of 
46%. It just looks like F is a “pullback” (which is a chart pattern) before the 
downward move resumes. 

The stock makes a lower bottom at G, and it looks to take as much time 
to return to H (from G) as the EF recovery. 

Events. If the markets are not bearish, then you’ll want to check news 
on the stock. Find out why the stock is dropping. For example, Toys-“R”- 
Us had problems competing with internet retailers and a large debt load that 
prevented them from updating their stores. They declared bankruptcy, so a 
cloudbank trade could have led to disaster. 


Focus on Failures 267 


GameStop suffered because people can download games without having 
to visit their brick-and-mortar stores. They make big bucks from used games, 
but digital downloading of games is jeopardizing those fat profit margins. 

Stamps.com suffered after losing an exclusive contract with the US 
postal service. 

‘These companies may not recover, so even if they show a cloudbank, the 
risk of continued losses suggests avoiding taking a position. 

Bear market. When I discovered the cloudbank pattern in early 2010, 
I thought it was just a quirk of one bear market. Indeed, the 2007-2009 bear 
market has many cloudbanks, but as this chart shows, clouds also appear outside 
of bear markets. The stocks stage their own bear market (outside of the indices). 

Recovery. If the indices continue making lower lows, there’s a good 
chance that your stock showing a cloudbank will drop, too. So don’t be in a 
hurry to buy. You may be able to make a purchase at a lower price. 

Having said that, most cloudbanks (63%) lead to a V-shaped recovery 
(17% are double bottoms, 12% are ugly double bottoms, and 8% are horizon- 
tal, to round out the lot), so waiting on the sidelines to buy means less risk but 
also potentially lower profit. 


Focus on Failures 


How do cloudbanks fail? Two ways: Price doesn’t return to the bottom of the 
cloudbank, or even if it does, it takes too long to get there. Perhaps the most 
dangerous mistake traders make is buying too soon, before price has bottomed. 

Figure 18.2 shows an example. The bottom of cloudbank D is at 28.64 and 
the stock bottoms at 15.42 (E), for a drop of 46%. That exceeds the 40% mini- 
mum drop for cloudbanks. If you were to wait for price to close above a 4-month 
simple moving average, you’d have bought into the stock at 21.26 the following 
month (first open in October). Ride the stock back up to the cloud, and you’d 
make almost 35%. That’s not bad, but it pales to buying in at 12.73 (two price bars 
after G) and riding it back up to 28.64, for a gain of 125%. Of course, the G entry 
requires perfect timing, so don’t be fooled. Finding the entry isn’t easy. 

Figure 18.3 shows a cloudbank nightmare unfolding. During July 2009, 
the company reverse-split their stock, combining twenty shares in return for 
one. That’s why the price on the right of the chart is so high. At B, the stock 
bottomed and I show an inset of the price bars. 

Not shown, but a 4-month simple moving average would have triggered 
a buy at the close of bar A. If you bought at the open the following month, you 
would have received a fill somewhere near 27.60. Two months later, you’d be 
staring at price hitting a low of 8.22 (©), for a potential loss of 70%. Wow. 

The stock recovered and has climbed to a high of about 67.50. That’s 
a nice return of 145%, but it’s a far cry from the bottom of the cloudbank 
(998.20) for a potential gain of 352%. 

It’s been a decade and price hasn’t climbed close to the cloudbank. 


268 Cloudbanks 


American International Group (AIG) 


att 
yl Het tee 
if ! I Wy, “ty 


en AP 
Hf alten! Pt 
i] iy | LF I" i 978 


Cloudbank 


\ 546 


Hi 


ay F 60 


alent TLE 


Cc 


| mr at 
i yf 


B 


B 


6 
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 


Figure 18.3 Price fails to recover after the bear market plunge. 


Table 18.2 

General Statistics 
Description Average Median 
Number found 439 N/A 
Cloud duration 2.8 years 2.2 years 
Drop from cloudbank to lowest low 68% 67% 
Drop for those that recovered to the cloudbank 66% 64% 
Drop for those that did not recover 82% 86% 
Number recovering to cloudbank 86% N/A 
Number climbing above cloudbank top 64% N/A 
Time to cloudbank 1.7 years 1.1 years 
Time through the cloudbank 2.8 years 1.9 years 
S&P 500 change 47% 36% 
Rise for those reaching cloud base 362% 178% 
Rise for all cloudbank patterns 386% 178% 
How many change trend? 99% N/A 
Statistics 


Table 18.2 shows statistics for cloudbanks. I found cloudbank patterns in 371 
stocks from January 1991 to October 2018. Let’s go through the stats one at a time. 

Number found. My hunt for cloudbanks found 439 patterns using 
the monthly scale only. The number isn’t an average, even though it’s in the 
average column in the table. 


Statistics 269 


Cloud duration. The patterns I found are long, lasting almost three 
years (as measured from the start to before the big plunge) on average. 

Drop from cloudbank to lowest low. The lowest low is point B in 
Figure 18.3. For stocks that had price return to the cloudbank, it was the low- 
est low between the end of the cloud and the date the stock returned to the 
cloudbank. For those stocks not returning to the cloud, I used the lowest low 
to end of data (most of the time; sometimes price came close to returning to 
the cloud, so I used the low between that point and the cloud end). 

The average drop from the base of the cloud to the lowest low was 68% 
in the stocks I looked at. 

Drop for those that recovered/did not recover to the cloudbank. I 
measured the drop from the base of the cloudbank to the lowest low. For those 
stocks that saw price return to the cloud, the drop (cloud to lowest low) aver- 
aged 66%. For those that did not return (or haven’t yet), the drop was larger, 
82% on average. Thus, if your stock has an unusually large drop (anything above 
66%), you might want to avoid trading the cloudbank unless other stocks are show- 
ing similar drops. 

Number recovering to cloudbank. Most (86%) of the stocks I looked at 
showed price returning to the cloudbank. The others, like AIG (Figure 18.3), 
have run out of data before making the return trip. 

Number climbing above cloudbank top. For those stocks in which 
price has returned to the bottom of the cloud, just 64% have pushed their way 
through overhead resistance and poked out above the top of the cloud. 

Time to/through cloudbank. Here’s an interesting statistic for clouds. 
It takes longer to rise through the cloud (2.8 years) than it does to move from 
the lowest low to the cloud base (1.7 years). Once price reaches the cloud, sell, 
and look elsewhere for another trade. 

S&P 500 change, rise for those reaching cloud base. The rise for 
stocks returning to the cloud averages 362% or a median of 178%. That 
compares to a rise of 47% and 36%, respectively, for the S&P over the same 
hold time. This measures from the lowest low to the bottom of the cloudbank. 
Keep in mind that you won’t be buying in at the lowest low, unless you time it 
perfectly, so your results will average far less than 362%. 

Rise for all cloudbank patterns. I measured the rise from the ultimate 
low to the lower of the bottom of the cloudbank or the peak before end of data. 
The stock may have moved higher. Indeed, one stock climbed from an ulti- 
mate low of 55 cents to $483.86 for a gain of 87,875%. Other stocks showed 
outlandish recovery prices, too, so I limited the upside to the bottom of the 
cloud. The table shows what I found. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how many cloudbanks see 
price rise more than 20%. Nearly all of the patterns qualify, perhaps due to the 
monthly scale and how far price rises to the ultimate high. I measured from the 
lowest low to the lower of the bottom of the cloudbank or as high as the stock 
has recovered so far. 


270 Cloudbanks 


Table 18.3 

Frequency Distribution of Time to Return to Cloud Base 
Years: 5 1 1.5 2 2.5 
Return 21% 27% 17% 9% 6% 
Cumulative 21% 48% 65% 73% 79% 
Years: 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 
Return 3% 2% 4% 4% 7% 
Cumulative 83% 84% 89% 93% 100% 


Table 18.3 shows a frequency distribution of those cloudbank trades that saw 
price return to the base of the cloud. For example, 21% of the patterns returned 
to the bottom of the cloud within 6 months. Another 27% took a full year to make 
the trip. By the end of the third year, 83% had completed the journey. 

Volume. I don’t show a table of volume statistics because there’s not much 
to tell. I found the average volume in the cloudbank (pattern start to end), in 
the drop leading to the lowest low (after pattern end to month before the low- 
est low), and at the lowest low (using the average of the one month). In 80% 
of the cases, volume was higher during the drop than during the cloudbank. 

When price bottomed at the ultimate low, just 44% of the time, volume 
was higher than during the cloudbank or subsequent drop. In other words, 
volume doesn’t give a reliable clue when the stock might turn upward for a 
sustained recovery. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 18.4 shows trading tactics. The sample trade provides more detail on 
how the moving average setup works. 

Bear market. The majority of cloudbanks have price that bottoms in or 
near (within less than a month of) a bear market. After the bear market ends, 
everyone jumps in to buy cheap stocks and the bull market begins with gusto, 
carrying stocks upward. 

Measure the drop. As the stock drops out of the cloudbank, measure 
how far it has dropped. I used 40% as the minimum drop for a cloudbank 
trade. If you buy into a cloudbank with a drop less than 40%, you risk seeing 
price continue lower or a small potential profit. 

As mentioned in Table 18.2, the usual drop below the bottom of the 
cloudbank averages 66% (median 64%); however, those cloudbank trades that 
struggle to return to the cloud have drops averaging 82% (86% median). Thus, 
if your stock is down substantially (more than 66%), it may take an unusually 
long time to recover to the cloudbank, if it ever does. 


Trading Tactics 271 


Table 18.4 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Bear market 69% of cloudbanks see the ultimate low in bear markets. 

Measure Large drops (80% or more) may signal an especially weak situation, where 
the drop price may not recover to the cloudbank for an unusually long time (if ever). 

Lowest low Use a 4-month simple moving average to time the entry. Buy at the 


open the month following price closing above the moving average. 
You can also look on the daily scale for an ugly double bottom (two 
bottoms with the second bottom well above the first). 


Crossover Once price closes above the moving average, check how far it is below 
the base of the cloudbank. If it’s less than 40%, the stock may 
continue down. Large declines (like 66%) mean more profit potential, 
and it supports the belief that the bottom is close by. 


Hold time Hold onto the stock until it reaches the cloudbank (unless fundamentals 
worsen or events suggest a continued drop). 
Sell at Once price reaches the cloudbank, the easy profit will be over. It may 
cloud base take a long time for price to rise above the cloudbank, so consider 


looking for another cloudbank setup instead of waiting for price to 
continue moving higher. 


Lowest low. If price drops in a straight-line run down (that is, price drops 
month after month, with little or no pause or retrace), a 4- or 5-month simple 
moving average may work well as an entry signal. Wait for price to close above 
the moving average and buy at the open the next month. 

Another method is to use a confirmed ugly double bottom chart pattern 
as a buy signal. Think of a double bottom except the second bottom is higher 
than the first (by more than 5%, but be flexible). When price closes above the 
top of the pattern, buy. Set a stop below the price of the first bottom (if you 
can tolerate such a loss). 

Crossover. If you’re using a moving average to time the entry, wait for 
price to cross above the simple moving average (SMA). I recommend a 4- 
or 5-month SMA. Tests of 4-, 5-, 7-, and 10-month SMAs show the 4 and 5 
month values have the largest gain and smallest hold-time loss (the maximum 
amount of money you might lose if you sold at the worst time). 

Measure the drop from the base of the cloud to the lowest low. If the 
stock has dropped less than 40%, wait. The stock may drop more. Otherwise, 
buy at the open in the next trading session. 

Hold time. Cloudbank trades are buy-and-hold investments. If price 
drops below your purchase price and it’s a bear market, don’t worry. Most 
stocks will be hurting, just like the one you bought. Check the news and fun- 
damentals. If they are fine, then hold on. If it is not a bear market, then recheck 
your work and the reason for buying the stock. If you continue to expect a 
recovery, then hold onto the position, otherwise sell it. 


272 Cloudbanks 


Sell at cloud base. Statistics show that it takes longer to move through 
the cloud than it takes to reach the cloud. Thus, if the stock reaches the bottom 
of the cloud (or even comes “near,” however you define “near”), then consider 
selling. There are times when the stock is chugging along, making new highs 
each month. In those cases, hold on and ride the stock through the cloud until 
price starts moving horizontally or falling. Then sell. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Northwest Pipe Co. 


Entry into a cloudbank for me is often set by when I have the cash and am 
looking to invest. I think that’s the case with Northwest Pipe Co. (NWPX). I 
also mention this trade briefly in the chapter on rectangle tops. 

In 2011 through most of 2012, the stock bounced off support at 19 to 21, 
forming a cloudbank. The last touch was in December 2012. After that, the 
stock climbed to a June 2014 high of over 41. And then it tumbled, dropping 
to 7.46 in early 2016. 

The stock recovered up to 12 and moved sideways, forming a rectangle 
top. From my notebook: “Chart pattern traded: Rectangle top, cloud bank 
(bottom at 19-21). Buy reason: rectangle top. I think the downward plunge 
from 2014 is over and this will bounce up after the rectangle breaks out 
upward. [’ll put a stop order to buy at 12.41, I think. This is thinly traded, 
and it’s a risk, so [ll buy lightly. Company makes engineered steel pipe 
water systems. I can’t see any growth in that industry. I was hoping the Flint, 
Michigan, debacle with their corroding pipes would spur some interest in 
this stock, but I don’t see that happening. They closed their Denver facility in 
mid-2015 and laid off 65 people. Yuck. If we get a downward breakout from 
the rectangle, then avoid this stock. 

“22 October 2016. The [conditional order] triggered two days ago for a 
buy at market open yesterday. It didn’t fill anywhere near the opening price 
[12.46, filled at 12.70]. Sheesh. It filled in the first minute, but right at the very 
top of that price bar. Bad execution. Even so, we had a good run up in the stock 
going into noon where it went horizontal the rest of the day. News said that on 
19 October, the company was awarded a contract to provide Tarrant Regional 
Water District and Dallas Water Utilities pipe, almost 67,000 feet of 84" con- 
crete pipe. No word on cost.” 

I bought slightly less than half a position with a target of 19 to 21 witha 
stop at 11.54 for a potential loss of 4.5%. Because this was a long-term holding 
(buy-and-hold), I didn’t place the stop with my broker. 


Experience 273 


About two weeks later, I filled out the second portion of the trade by buy- 
ing again, this time trading a V-bottom chart pattern. See that chapter for the 
entry. They share the same exit, which follows. 

The stock climbed but missed the 19 target by 8 cents. It plunged back 
to 14 and change, only to rise back up to peak at 19.55 just over a month later. 

I didn’t sell through any of those gyrations. The stock dropped to 12.41 
and recovered going into 2018. From my notebook: “9 January 2018. S&P says 
strong sell as of 3 January 2018. Everything is negative: value, quality, growth, 
financial health, price momentum. Other analysts are red [bearish], too. Dump 
this? Insiders are holding onto shares, though. Cloudbank is at 20, so [the stock 
is] right there, at the base.” 

On the sell order, I wrote, “Sell reason: This didn’t go anywhere this past 
year but what scares the willy out of me is the negative analyst view. So ’m 
going to let it all go. Sell reason: Hit cloudbank base.” 

On the trade, I made 51%. 


¢ Lesson: I was late buying into the trade, both in time and price. The 
turn at bottoms is often V-shaped, whereas peaks are more rounded 
looking. Try to improve the entry. 

¢ Lesson: If the stock nears a target within 3%, then consider selling. 


The second lesson I grabbed from another chapter in this book, but it 
holds true for this trade, too. The stock hit my 19 target in January 2017 and 
missed it by 8 cents the prior November. I could have met the target and 
looked elsewhere for another trade (or traded this one again). Instead, I held 
on and watched the stock drop back to near my buy price before recovering. 

Of course, this wasn’t a swing trade; it was buy-and-hold. The stock con- 
tinued higher, in large up-and-down swings, eventually reaching 36.70 in Feb- 
ruary 2020, but that’s still below the top of the cloudbank. If I held onto the 
stock longer, I could have almost doubled my money in about 2 years, but that’s 
if I sold at the top (which is doubtful). 


Dead-Cat Bounce 


Three of my cloudbank trades ended with a dead-cat bounce. American Equity 
Life (AEL) started as a nice cloudbank. I bought near the low and the stock 
moved up. Then news came: “Down 15% on news the US targeted annuities 
in Obama retirement rules. The company is the 2nd biggest seller of the prod- 
ucts.” I happened to check in during the day, saw the news, and sold, taking a 
2% loss. Four months later, it broke out upward from its sideways move and 
hit my target (cloudbank low) in 6 months. 


¢ Lesson: Try to better understand the implications an event can have 
ona stock. 


274 Cloudbanks 


Because the stock was down 15% on the news, others voted with their sell 
orders, just as I did. To me, the news sounded like a company making buggy 
whips when cars were introduced. Was their way of life ending? I thought so, 
but time healed the outlook and the stock climbed. 

In Gap (GPS), I was looking for a climb from about 30 where I bought to 
36 to 40 as a swing trade back up to the bottom of the cloud. Instead, 10 days 
after I bought, I sold it. “Sell reason: DCB: The news said that SSS [same-store 
sales] were pitiful, and the stock was down like 9% after market. So I decided 
to sell it at the open. That saved me some bucks since it closed over a dollar 
lower.” The stock bottomed 34% below where I sold. 

In Newell (NWL), in late December 2017, I bought half a position in 
the stock on a cloudbank play to 45. From my notebook: “I’m hoping we don’t 
DCB again in 1.5 months. I’m hoping to ride this up to the cloudbank at 45 
and above.” The first dead-cat bounce was in early November, and I usually 
avoid taking a position in a stock that shows one for 6 months. Why? Because 
the percentages are too high that another DCB will happen. 

From my notebook: “Date sold: 25 January 2018. Order details: Sold all 
at a few minutes before 10 a.m. after logging in to check on my portfolio. Stock 
was down 6+ points from prior close on earnings warning and said it plans to 
sell off assets, close factories, closing up to half of them. Ouch.” 


¢ Lesson: Don’t take a position in a company with a dead-cat bounce 
within 6 months. 


Sample Trade 


I offer two sample trades, the first of which I show in Figure 18.4. This is a monthly 
chart of a cloudbank with a base, A, of about 23.’ The stock climbed much higher 
than that within the cloud, but the base of the cloud found support near 23. 

I tried to find out the reason for the drop that began in August 2011, but 
news on the company’s website didn’t go back that far. 

A 4-month simple moving average (SMA) shows price closing above the 
SMA at B. That’s the buy signal. A trade entered at the open the next month 
(C) would fill near 12.88. 

After that, it’s a matter of waiting for price to climb back to 23, the base 
of the cloud. Notice that price dropped as low as 8.81 in 2013 (a 32% drop 
below the buy price), which is a substantial potential loss. But cloudbanks are 
buy-and-hold investments, not short-term swing trades. The hold part means 
holding your nose and not watching the stock drop. 

Anyway, the stock recovered and reached the cloud at D. Sell, right? No. 
What’s the hurry? If the stock is moving up, why not let it coast higher? You 
can watch the chart, and if the stock on the monthly scale makes a higher low, 
hold. If it makes a lower low, then sell at the open the following month. 


Sample Trade 275 


Amedisys Inc (AMED) 


i 

fie hi 
| |! 43 
ify . fi i | 


l 
4-Month Simple 1 il 30 
Moving Average 


yr 


| 
ie 
r IW \ haf i 


2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 


Figure 18.4 A 4-month simple moving average provides a buy signal. 


ConAgra Brands Inc (CAG) 
} 39 


yl h 
| / pha? } 1, a fh 
ty wet hey ie. pe Hy \ bh 37 


aL 
as Cloudbank Ip hy 


| 
uy My 


~~ 120-Day Simple Moving Average 35 

| I 
4 

Cloud at 32 h 


yf \ , ° 
\ ; iy hs Ny i 229 
. 1 i pf 27 


| 25 
Buy 


I 
D Mh 23 
WF ake 
iy 21 
A c 
Jan18 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov DecjJan19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 18.5 An ugly double bottom provides a buy signal. 


Let’s say you’ll hold onto the stock until it stops making higher highs. 
That happens at E. So you sell at the open the next month and receive a fill 
at 28.34 for a gain of 120%. That’s a little less than a 3-year hold time, or 
41% annually. 

Figure 18.5 shows the next trade, but this one uses a chart pattern I call 
an ugly double bottom. Regular double bottoms are covered elsewhere in this 
book (see the Adam and Eve combinations of double bottoms). An ugly dou- 
ble bottom occurs when price on the second bottom is more than 5% above 
the low of the first bottom. Entry is the same as a traditional double bottom 


276 Cloudbanks 


(a close above the top of the pattern). The 5% number is arbitrary, so the num- 
ber is not as important as price making a higher low. 

If you look at the monthly chart of this stock (daily is shown), you'll see 
price bottoming near 32. On this chart, however, price forms a higher cloud- 
bank at about 35. Let’s use the lower cloudbank because there’s where over- 
head resistance will likely appear. 

Trouble started in December 2018, according to the chart, when price 
began to spiral downward like a biplane doing aerobatics. According to the 
company’s website, the company entered into a definitive agreement to divest 
the Wesson® oil brand, announced on 18 December, but it wouldn’t occur until 
sometime in the first quarter of 2019. Two days later, the company announced 
second quarter results. 

The stock bottomed at A, at a low of 20.22 on 26 December. Price recov- 
ered to B and formed a higher low at C. Although the bottom at C is not 5% 
higher than A, it does suggests a recovery (a higher low followed by a higher 
high is often used as a benchmark of an upward price trend). 

At D, price closed above the high at B, and that was the entry signal. Buy 
the following day at the open for a fill near 22.87. 

Notice that the 4-month SMA (EF, about 27.70) is well above the buy 
price. In this example, waiting for price to climb above the SMA means giving 
away a substantial amount of money. 

Price on this chart has climbed to F, just short of the 32 target, but more 
recently is above 37. The stock returned to the cloud. 

If you used the ugly double bottom entry method and sold at the 32 cloud 
base, you would make about 40%. Using the moving average method in this 
example would give a potential gain of 16%. 

The maximum you could have made on this trade (assuming a return to 
the cloudbank at 32) would be (32 — 20.22)/20.22 or 58%. That gain is best 
case. The realistic profit is much less, depending on your skill at entering the 
trade and the stock’s cooperation in climbing to the base of the cloud or even 
higher. Along the way, you may suffer a big potential loss when the stock forms 
a second bottom (as in Figure 18.4, with a lower low in 2013). 

Also notice that each of these cloudbank trades did not happen in a bear 
market. Bear market trades can be easier. Wait for a large drop (60% to 70%) 
and buy when the stock appears to find a bottom. With a 60% sale on the 
stock, you can take comfort in knowing that you are buying closer to the bot- 
tom than the top. All you have to do is wait for a bull market to send the stock 
higher. Yes, it could take years, but that is how you make the big bucks. 


19 


Crab®, Bearish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Looks like a big W with the location of turns governed by Fibonacci ratios. 


Downward Moves 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance rank 1 (best) out of 5 2 out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 19.8% 8.9% 
Average drop -14.3% -22.9% 
Volume trend Random Upward 
Point D reversal rate 87% 91% 
See also Big W, bearish bat, bearish butterfly, bearish crab, 

bearish Gartley 


The bearish crab chart pattern looks like a big W except Fibonacci numbers 
qualify valid patterns. [ll explain appearance later in this chapter. 

I measure performance of Fibonacci-based patterns differently than I do 
other chart pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at the end 
of the pattern and not an up or down breakout. Therefore, the layout of this 
chapter is different from most other chapters in this book. 

The Results Snapshot shows the important numbers for this pattern, 
starting with the performance rank. This pattern places first and second in bull 
and bear markets, respectively. Take a bow. I measured performance from the 
high at the end of the pattern to the ultimate low, so [can compare performance 
from pattern to pattern. 


2/7 


278 Crab®, Bearish 


The breakeven failure rate is better than non-Fibonacci-based patterns, 
too. The breakeven failure rate describes a measure that counts how often price 
fails to drop more than 5% after turn D (D is the last point in the pattern). 

The average drop is mixed, though. The bull market average is slightly 
worse but the bear market is slightly better than non-Fibonacci-based patterns. 

The volume trend is random, really, for both bull and bear markets (50% 
for bulls and 51% for bears). 

The next line in the table may be the most important: the reversal rate 
when price reaches D. Swing traders will want to see price drop at D so they 
can short the stock or sell a long holding. The above table shows at least 87% 
of the time price drops after turn D. We'll see later how far price drops. That’s 
important, too. A pattern may have a large reversal rate, but if price doesn’t 
travel down far from there, it’s like trying to drive to work on a flat tire (mean- 
ing it’s dangerous). 

Let’s surf the trading waters for bearish crabs to see what they look like. 


Tour 


Figure 19.1 shows a bearish crab at turns XABCD. Before we discuss the pat- 
tern, look at the price landscape. At F the stock peaks but moves horizontally 
for several months, forming a flat top. After that horizontal movement, a chart 
pattern appears. The pattern is the crab or the double bottom at AC. In many 
cases that I looked at, the bullish chart pattern (such as the double bottom) fails 
to work as expected or as well as expected (you'll see price rise a few percent 
and then turn lower, busting the upward breakout). 


FE Alliance Data Systems Corp (ADS) 
H : hm | D 308 
hy ie eee y vt 2 
rum A 1 bat 284 
isa, ; ate ; ‘hy mh, 276 
I a B | lily " 268 


a 4 260 
HVA Dhl ; 
bids N 2a 


A 


Feb Mar Apr = May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan16 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 19.1 This bearish crab sees price tumble after D. 


Identification Guidelines 279 


In this case, the bullish double bottom does see price rise but only to D. 
After that, price tumbles. The move amounted to a rise from B (the top of the 
double bottom) to D of 13%. That’s good for a swing trade but far below the 
average rise for double bottoms. 

Be cautious when you see price form a top and a bullish chart pattern 
appears at the end of that top. It can be a bull trap. 

Let’s talk about the bearish crab. Price drops into the pattern from F, 
forming the five turns XABCD. The turns are set by Fibonacci numbers, 
which I’ll discuss in the next section. Don’t depend on the pattern looking like 
this. Because the Fibonacci numbers vary, the shape of the pattern will look 
different from example to example. However, if you look at them from across 
the room (maybe using a large room and squinting), they’Il appear like a big W 
or double bottom with tall sides. 

At the end of the pattern, price rises to D. Here’s the key to Fibonacci 
patterns. They are supposed to make a substantial turn at D. In this case, being 
a bearish crab, price is supposed to turn down. That doesn’t always happen, but 
for the crab, the turn rate is very high, at least 87% of the time. 

The turn rate is the first half of the puzzle. The second half is how far 
price drops. It doesn’t do traders much good if price whips back upward. For 
the crab, the average decline is weak (14% in bull markets, but only if you trade 
it perfectly and often enough). For a swing trader, buying in late and exiting 
early or late will cut that percentage down, so you may struggle making money 
with this pattern. 

It’s also possible you could do better, because the 14% number is an average 
of over 1,300 patterns. If you have a better pattern recognition algorithm than 
the one I used or employ additional trading tools to filter out duds, then there’s 
money to be made. Even just knowing that price will turn down at D is valuable. 

In the example shown in Figure 19.1, the stock turned down at D and 
dropped, gapping lower at E (breakaway or continuation gap) and breaking 
out of the pattern downward there. The drop to the low in February almost 
cut the price of the stock in half. Bet that hurt. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 19.1 shows the identification guidelines. Figure 19.2 shows what a 
well-behaved bearish crab should look like and how it should perform. 

Appearance. I don’t know how the crab name came about for this pat- 
tern. What we see in the pattern are a number of tight turns (XABC) with 
point D way off in the boonies. That’s because the Fibonacci extension for the 
DBC turn is a long one, between 2.618 and 3.618 of the BC length. Let’s talk 
about how I programmed my computer to find the turns. 

BA/XA retrace. Retrace BA of the XA move must be one of the Fibo- 
nacci numbers listed in Table 19.1. To find the value of B, I first picked two 


280 Crab®, Bearish 


Table 19.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Looks like a big W with the location of turns governed by Fibo- 
nacci ratios. 


BA/XA retrace The ratio of BA/XA is one of .382, .5, or .618. 
BC/BA retrace The ratio of BC/BA is one of .382, .5, .618, .707, .786, or .886. 


DC/BC extension The extension of leg DC to BC is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 2.618, 
3.14, or 3.618. 


DA/XA extension The ratio of DA to XA is 1.618. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for most 
chart patterns. 


Apache Corp. (APA) D 
ytlel 49 
th ‘| 47 


M, wet wh 
A fe yi * a? Poy hh, 45 


ie 
uy Wins : 


1 
18 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb 


Figure 19.2 This well-behaved crab has a downward breakout. 


minor high-low turns (X and A) and then searched for turn B. In this example, 
the high at X was 46.89, the low at A was 41.68, and the high-low range of 
B was 44.54 to 43.61. I used the high-low range of the last point to see if it 
spanned a Fibonacci number. If it did, then I found turn B. Here’s the equa- 
tion using the high at B: (44.54 — 41.68)/(46.89 — 41.68) or 0.55. Using the low 
at B we find: (43.61 — 41.68)/(46.89 — 41.68) or 0.37. The range of .37 to .55 
encompassed two Fibonacci numbers, .382 and .5, so we found turn B. 

BC/BA retrace. The retrace of BC to BA used the low at A, the high at 
B, and the last point used the high-low range of C. C has a high-low value of 
42.92 to 41.82. Plugging the values into the ratio formula (B — C)/(B — A), we 
find the range to be .57 to .95. The range comfortably fits the numbers listed 
in Table 19.1, so we found a valid turn C. 


Focus on Failures 281 


DC/BC extension. The extension works the same way as a retrace. In 
this case, the formula is (D — C)/(B — C). Using the high-low value of D (50.03 
to 48.19) gets a Fibonacci range of 2.34 to 3.02. Point D spans the 2.618 Fibo- 
nacci number, so D qualifies. 

I use the high-low range for the last point in each turn because Fibo- 
nacci patterns are complicated and that makes them rare. Giving them a bit 
of leeway at each turn helps boost the sample count without including bogus 
patterns. At least, that’s my impression of the results. Your software may use a 
different algorithm and find different results. 

DA/XA retrace. For the last turn, I use a 3% window. Plugging numbers 
into the ratio using the high at X, low at A, and high at D gives a value of 1.6. 
That’s within 3% of the target 1.618 Fibonacci number. The pattern qualifies 
as a valid bearish crab. 

Duration. I limited patterns to no more than 6 months long. 

The stock dropped from D, just as it was supposed to, cutting price more 
than half in less than 3 months. Don’t expect this kind of decline from bearish 
crabs, though. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 19.3 shows what I consider a failure of the bearish crab to perform 
as expected. I show the crab marked by turns XABCD. The turns have been 
checked, and they qualify as a valid Fibonacci pattern. Volume trends lower at 
F (verified using linear regression) probably due to the tall volume spike at the 
start of the pattern. 


Xcel Energy, Inc (XEL) 


Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec jJan17 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 19.3. This bearish crab fails to see price drop far after turn D. 


282 Crab®, Bearish 


The move from the July peak in 2016 to D is a nice and gentle rounded 
turn. The rising channel at G forms a handle for a cup with handle pattern. 
That’s a bullish pattern, and it works in this example. Price rises after the han- 
dle, peaking at 52 and change in mid-November (not shown). 

Let’s focus on the crab. In this example, price turns lower at D, but price 
doesn’t drop far, to E. That drop measures 3%, well short of the 14% average 
drop for bearish crabs. This crab shows an example of what I call a 5% failure. 

I count how many times a chart pattern fails to see price drop more than 
5%. The 5% failure rate for crabs is almost 20%. That’s high, but anything 
above zero is high if you’re on the losing end of a trade. 

Price drops to E in this example, in a 1-day plunge before beginning the 
retrace. The stock moves higher as I discussed. If you were to short the stock 
at D, you would have difficulty pulling out a profit from the trade. 

If you held a stock long and expected a steep drop at D and sold proac- 
tively to maintain your profit, the pat on the back you gave yourself as price 
dropped to E would be a hammer blow to the shoulder when the stock peaked 
at 52 in the winter. 

So let’s discuss the performance numbers to get a better handle on how 
bearish crabs actually perform. 


Statistics 


Table 19.2 shows general statistics for the bearish crab. 

Number found. I dug up 1,566 crabs in 883 stocks using data from 
December 1990 to June 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire time, and some 
stocks no longer trade. 

Breakeven failure rate. This is a count of how many patterns fail to see 
price drop more than 5% below the high at D. The lower the number, the 
better. As the table shows, and as one would expect, bear markets have less 
than half the failure rate of bull markets. That’s because price is following the 
downward market trend in bear markets instead of dropping against a rising 
trend in bull markets. 


Table 19.2 
General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,357 209 
Breakeven failure rate 19.8% 8.9% 
Average decline after D -14.3% -22.9% 
Volume trend 50% Random 51% Upward 


Performance Up/Down volume -15% U, -13% D -24% U, -22% D 


Trading Tactics 283 


Average decline after D. I measured the average decline from the peak 
at D to either the ultimate low (the lowest low before price climbed more than 
20%) or the lowest low measured from D to where price closed above point D. 
Patterns in bear markets show larger declines. No surprise there. 

Volume trend, performance. The volume trend numbers are random. 
However, the performance numbers confirm that crabs with upward volume 
trends (as measured using linear regression from the start of the pattern to the 
end, X to D) marginally outperform those with downward volume trends. I 
consider the performance differences to deserve a yawn. 


Trading Tactics 


Swing traders will want to pay attention, especially if they aren’t shy about 
shorting a stock. The bearish crab is all about going short at or slightly after 
turn D. How well does that work? I crunched some numbers, and Table 19.3 
shows them. 

How often does price turn at D? If price doesn’t turn down often 
enough, then the pattern is unreliable and difficult to trade profitably. The 
crab does a good job forming a minor high at D and pushing price lower. The 
turn rate is 87% in bull markets and even better in bear markets. In other 
words, you can depend on price turning lower at D. 

How many drop to. . .? Even if you have a high turn rate for price drop- 
ping after D, it doesn’t do much good if price doesn’t drop far enough to make 
a profit. The 5% failure rate shown in Table 19.2 helps assess that, but so does 
measuring how often price reaches one of the turning points in the pattern. 

For example, in the patterns I looked at in bull markets, the stocks saw 
price drop to X (the closest point below D) 59% of the time and slightly better 
in bear markets, 68% of the time. That’s not very good. Turns A, B, and C are 
lower than X, and they show price struggling to reach them. 

The percentages shown in the table aren’t that good, so do take care if 
you decide to short a stock showing a bearish crab. If you own a stock long, it 
might be prudent to ignore the pattern and just hold on, but that decision rests 


Table 19.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price turn at D? 87% 91% 
How many drop to point X? 59% 68% 
How many drop to point A? 18% 34% 
How many drop to point B? 37% 51% 


How many drop to point C? 23% 41% 


284 Crab®, Bearish 


with you and your situation. It might be that the crab is warning of impending 
doom (like Figure 19.2 shows). Or it might be a Figure 19.3 type of fake-out 
(where price climbs shortly after D). 


Sample Trade 


Figure 19.4 shows a stock Sandy traded. Her computer software found the 
bearish crab (marked as XABCD) after the peak at D appeared. The volume 
trend at F tilted upward, but that didn’t bother her. She saw the swift rise from 
C to D and thought it had potential for continuing the uptrend. 

Why? 

“See that pattern, the two converging lines after D?” She pointed to her 
computer screen. “That’s a pennant. Those can be half-staff patterns, meaning 
the upward trend might be only half over.” 

“But doesn’t the bearish crab warn of a downturn at De” I asked. 

“Let’s not confuse the issue with facts.” 

‘To calculate the height of the flagpole, she used the high at D (47.20) and 
the low at H (42.40) as the start of the flagpole. 

“Why H,” I asked, “and not Ce” 

“H is where price starts to go vertical.” The height of the flagpole was 
4.80. The bottom of the pennant was at 46.15 for a target of 50.95. “Hmm. 
The target is below round number resistance, 51, but pushing through 50 will 
pose a challenge. Let’s use 50.93 as the target so I get out before other traders 
who will sell at 51.” 


Automatic Data Processing Inc (ADP) 


sty luk | AN : 


eta ihe hah | 
ee 


39 
05 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 06 Feb Mar 


Figure 19.4 Sandy ignored the bearish crab and used a pennant to trade 
this stock. 


Sample Trade 285 


She placed a buy stop a penny above the top of D to get into the trade as 
soon as possible. The buy stop triggered at FE, and she received a fill of 47.21. 

“What about a stop?” 

“Stop? What’s that?” She grinned. The bottom of the pennant was at 
46.15, so she placed a stop-loss order at 46.07. With a buy price of 47.21 and 
a stop at 46.07, the potential loss was a reasonable 2.4%. If price reached her 
target, that meant a gain of about 8%. “That’s a win/loss ratio of about three to 
one, but I don’t really pay attention to that.” 

Eight days after she bought, the stock looked as if it were heading higher 
(to the highest peak on the chart). Then things went bad. 

The stock eased lower, dropping far enough to hit her stop at G. She lost 
2.4% on the trade. 

“It was a winning trade,” she said. 

My eyebrow shot up. “But you lost money.” 

“T won because I traded it correctly. I followed my trading plan.” 

If you focus on perfecting your technique and not on money, you'll do 
better with less stress. 


20 


Crab®, Bullish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: The pattern is composed of five turns, four of which are based on 
Fibonacci ratios. 


Upward Moves 

Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance rank 3 out of 5 2 out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 7.1% 2.6% 
Average rise 39.1% 32.7% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
Point D reversal rate 92% 84% 
See also Big M, double tops (all types), bullish bat, bullish 


butterfly, bullish Gartley 


The bullish crab is one of the Fibonacci-based patterns. That means the pattern’s 
turns must pass inspection by the Fibonacci police (I'll explain that in Identifica- 
tion Guidelines). I measure performance of Fibonacci-based patterns differently 
than I do other chart pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at 
the end of the pattern and not an upward or downward breakout. Therefore, the 
layout of this chapter is different from most other chapters in this book. 

The failure rate for bullish crabs ranks first (best, not shown in the above 
table) compared to other Fibonacci-based patterns, and they are substantially 
below non-Fibonacci-based patterns (which is good for this pattern, too). 
However, the average rise is nothing to write home about for both Fibonacci 


286 


Tour 287 


and non-Fibonacci-based patterns in bull markets. In bear markets, the aver- 
age rise beats most non-Fibonacci patterns and places second out of 5 for Fib- 
onacci patterns. 

Let me emphasize that the average rise doesn’t really apply to this pat- 
tern, so don’t worry about underperformance. We’re looking to buy the stock 
not after an upward breakout, but after the pattern bottoms at D, the end of 
the pattern. ’ll discuss this more later. 

The reversal rate is the elephant in the room (careful where you step). 
If price doesn’t turn higher at the end of the pattern (turn D), then swing 
traders will find it difficult to make money. With this pattern, the turn rate 
is at Jeast 84% (bear market, on average), which I consider excellent. But we 
need to see if a sustained price trend develops after the turn. That’s because 
performance might be like many candlestick patterns I tested. Some have high 
reversal rates, but price doesn’t go anywhere. Those candlesticks aren’t trad- 
able patterns (by themselves). 

Before we go any further, let’s see what a bullish crab looks like. [Quick 
anecdote: When I was living in Boston, I owned two 11” Oscars (a fish), which 
I raised from 4”. Anyway, I bought a crab, and one of the Oscars ate the thing. 
All I saw of the crab was one red claw poking the Oscar in the eye. I turned 
vegetarian after that.] 


Tour 


Figure 20.1 shows an example of a bullish crab with an upward reversal at D. 
Turns XABCD compose the crab pattern. Fibonacci ratios determine three of 


Arrow Electronics (ARW) 


18 
Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 02 


Figure 20.1 This bullish crab forms an extended V-bottom at turn D. 


288 Crab®, Bullish 


the turns with the first two points being a random selection until you can find a 
qualified point B. I’ll talk more about how I find these patterns in the next sec- 
tion. Let me add that you need a computer with pattern recognition software 
to find crabs. If you want the one I used, it’s available for free at my website: 
www. ThePatternSite.com. 

Volume (F) slopes downward in this example, and that’s unusual because 
it happens once every three crabs. Even so, we’ll see that an upward volume 
trend in bull markets can improve performance by a few percentage points. 

At D, price reaches the end of the crab, forming a V-bottom pattern with 
an extension (G) in this example (that is, an extended V-bottom chart pattern). 
The stock makes a dramatic and wallet/purse-filling rise to E where an upward 
breakout occurs (a close above the high price of turn A constitutes an upward 
breakout). Unfortunately, the stock runs out of steam and price collapses, but 
only for a few weeks before the stair-step rise resumes. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 20.1 shows identification guidelines for crabs. Refer to Figure 20.2 for 
a visual. I show the bullish crab as turns XABCD. Volume slopes upward (E) as 
measured using linear regression from point X to D (the start and end of the 
crab). This crab breaks out upward at F when price closes above the top of the 
pattern. However, the rise from D is what’s important for swing traders (who 
buy near the D low and surf price higher). 

Appearance. The crab pattern is a five-turn beast. What I find odd about 
this pattern is both the name (crab) and how far turn D is from the body of the 
pattern. As they say, it is what it is. Let’s discuss how I find the five turns. 


Table 20.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance The pattern is composed of five turns, many of which are based on 
Fibonacci ratios. 


AB/AX retrace The Fibonacci ratio should be one of .382, .5, or .618. 
CB/AB retrace The ratio should be one of the Fibonacci numbers: .382, .5, .618, .707, 


.786, or .886. 

CD/CB extension The extension of leg CD to CB is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 2.618, 
3.14, or 3.618. 

AD/AX retrace The ratio of AD to AX is 1.618. 

Volume Volume is upward the majority of the time, but this is an observation, 


not a requirement. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for most 
chart patterns. 


Identification Guidelines 289 


Cree Inc (CREE) 


at 


A 
bi, 7 at c 

Mee hay hye «eh 
a wt bay 
ie oe Ve 
fil x hy , ft 
*d iL. t' 
I W iy 37 


18 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec jJan19 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 20.2 This bullish crab shows a sustained uptrend after an upward breakout. 


AB/AX retrace. I programmed my computer to find minor highs and 
lows and selected two points, X and A. Then I searched for turn B. If the ratio 
of AB to AX spans one of the three Fibonacci numbers listed in the table, then 
point B is a valid crab turn. 

To do this, [used the low at X (40.75), high at A (51.78), and for the target 
turn (the last point of the three), the high-low range of B (45.64 to 44.34). 
Plugging the numbers into the ratio we get (using the high at B): (51.78 —45.64)/ 
(51.78 — 40.75) or .56. Using the low at B, we get (51.78 —44.34)/(51.78 — 40.75) 
or .67. The range .56 to .67 spans the .618 number, so we found turn B. 

CB/AB retrace. In a similar manner, I use the high-low range of C 
(41.82 to 48.23) along with the high at A and low at B. If you plug the numbers 
into the CB/AB ratio, you get a range of .20 to .52. That range spans .382 and 
5 from Table 20.1, so we found point C. 

CD/CB extension. For the extension, I use the same high-low method 
with the last point (D, 34.85 to 33.72). [also use the low at B, and high at C. 
That gives a range of 3.44 to 3.74. The 3.618 number fits snugly in that range, 
so point D is valid, too. 

AD/AX retrace. For the last ratio, I use a 3% window to check if the AD 
to AX ratio is 1.618. Plugging in the high at A, low at X, and low at D, we get 
(51.78 — 33.72)/(51.78 — 40.75) or 1.64, which is within 3% of 1.618. In other 
words, the pattern qualifies as a valid bullish crab. Your pattern recognition 
software may use a different algorithm and find different results. 

Volume. Volume shown during formation of the crab is usually upward, 
and that’s good news in bull markets (performance improves). 

Duration. | limited pattern length to 6 months or less. That’s an arbitrary 
limit I place on some patterns when searching for them. 


290 Crab®, Bullish 


Scotts Miracle-Gro Co. (SMG) 


Nov Dec Jan 14 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan15 


Figure 20.3 This bullish crab breaks out downward after climbing just 2% above 
the low at D. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 20.3 shows what I consider to be a failure of a bullish crab to perform 
as expected. Volume (F) slopes upward as it does over 60% of the time. 

In this example, the stock reaches point D and price forms a bottom, just 
as it is supposed to do. However, the stock forgets to rise much (just 2%). The 
stock breaks out downward when it closes below turn D and makes its way 
down to E. 

Price doesn’t stay down long at E, just one trading day. Price does a quick 
reverse and climbs up, forming a near-vertical wall to the late August peak. 

The failure of the stock to climb at more than 5% after D I classify as a 
failure. Fortunately, these types of situations are rare, happening about 7% or 
less of the time. The failure rate is low, even for non-Fibonacci-based chart 
patterns, and it’s even lower in bear markets, 2.6%. 

A stop-loss order placed below the low at D will protect you from this 
kind of failure. Just be sure turn D is in place. 

Let’s discuss performance using numbers. 


Statistics 


Table 20.2 shows general statistics for crabs. 

Number found. Bullish crabs are rare. I found them in 530 stocks, iden- 
tifying just 737 patterns that I catalogued. I found the first crab in July 1991 
and the most recent one in June 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, 
and some no longer trade. 


Trading Tactics 291 


Table 20.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 553 184 
Breakeven failure rate 7.1% 2.6% 
Average rise after D 39.1% 32.7% 
Volume trend 61% Upward 65% Upward 
Performance Up/Down volume 41%U, 36%D 33%U, 33%D 


Breakeven failure rate. As I mentioned, the failure rate for bullish crabs 
is low, lower than traditional chart patterns and even lower than the average 
Fibonacci-based pattern. Performance measures the rise from the low at D to 
the ultimate high. The ultimate high is the highest peak before price drops 
more than 20% or the highest high before price closes below D (the bottom of 
the pattern). I counted how often price failed to rise more than 5%. 

Average rise after D. The average rise from the low at point D to the 
ultimate high in bull markets needs work. It’s below average. The bear market 
number, however, is above average for both Fibonacci-based and non-Fib patterns. 

Volume trend, performance. I used linear regression on volume from 
point X to D to determine the trend. Keeping in mind that in bull markets, the 
average rise is 39%, crabs with volume trending upward see price rise an aver- 
age of 41%. Downward volume trends are hurt more, when price rises just 36%. 

Bear markets don’t seem to care about the volume trend. Perhaps with 
additional samples, they’ll take an interest. 


Trading Tactics 


As I mentioned, swing traders will want to participate in knowing when turn 
D is in place, and the math for the pattern can give you a clue (you can predict 
the price of turn D). Then, wait for the stock to bottom at D. Once the turn is 
in place, buy the stock and ride it higher. Here are some numbers for you to 
gauge performance. 

Table 20.3 shows how price behaves at and after the end of the pattern. 
Fibonacci patterns have two important features: Price reverses at D and forms 
a trend. How well do those features work for bullish crabs? 

How often does price turn at D? Price turns upward most often in bull 
markets, as one would expect. The bear market is a slacker, when price bottoms 
at D 84% of the time. That’s still a good turn rate. 

How many rise to. . .? After price bottoms in well-behaved crabs, price 
rises, but how far? Here’s where the results are weak in my view. The closest 
turn to bottom D is X. If you look back at the charts in this chapter, point X is 
not exactly close to D. So there’s a substantial rise just to reach X. Remember 


292 Crab®, Bullish 


Table 20.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price turn at D? 92% 84% 
How many rise to point X? 65% 55% 
How many rise to point A? 33% 14% 
How many rise to point B? 48% 30% 
How many rise to point C? 36% 17% 


that if price closes below D, then I take the highest peak between that point 
and D as the ultimate high. 

Price reaches the low at X between 55% of the time (bear market) and 
65% of the time (bull market). The table shows the hit rate for the other turns: 
A, B, and C. 

For example, if you hope price will climb to the high at A, which is the 
top of the pattern, price will reach or exceed that target just 33% of the time in 
bull markets and less than half that in bear markets (14%). 

As a swing trader, keep these percentages in mind and trade accordingly. 
If price is on a tear, let it continue rising . . . until it stops. Then get out. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 20.4 shows a sample trade that Sam made. His trading software identi- 
fied the XABCD bullish crab automatically for him, soon after turn D appeared. 
Volume has an upward slope (E) according to linear regression, but it’s hard to 


CNO Financial Group, Inc (CNO) 


Waal a we ay ie ake 2 22 
' i i” aT i W iar ; . 21 
y oa , tN i tint 4 . 20 

f " yf La Ls hy 19 

"Wy off 18 

DF sa hon - 


18 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar 


Figure 20.4 Sam spotted this bullish crab but shorted the stock. 


Sample Trade 293 


see that trend by looking at the chart. Regardless, volume considerations didn’t 
make a meaningful contribution to the trade. 

Sam knows from experience that when a reversal pattern appears soon 
after a horizontal peak, it’s a disaster waiting to happen. In this case, the hori- 
zontal peak was the AC move extended to the right, to the start of the trend- 
line). This elongated top meant the bulls and bears were struggling for control 
but couldn’t resolve their conflict. The slight downward tilt pushed the odds 
of winning to the bears. 

The bears eventually won and shoved the stock downward through sup- 
port. Even though the bulls tried to rally a few times on the way to point D, 
they didn’t have lasting success (certainly not a trend change). 

If you were to see the longer-term chart, you’d find that the A-C high is 
really part of a longer-term downtrend that started back in January 2018, sug- 
gesting more pressure to send the stock lower. 

‘To Sam, though, the stock just Jooked as if it would continue lower. A 
check of other stocks in the same industry showed a mix. One was moving up 
at a good clip over the past year. One was moving up, but at a slower pace. One 
was flat and four, yes, four were dropping. It was a mix, but leaning toward 
being bearish. 

He did his financial diligence on the company and what he found 
supported his bearish stance. Sam placed an order to short the stock a penny 
below the low at D and received a fill at 17.62. 

Why short then? His answer: “You don’t short a stock making new highs. 
You short ones making new lows.” 

“But what about the bullish crab?” I asked. 

“It died when the pattern broke out downward.” 

After the order filled, he placed an order to cover his short should the 
stock rise to 18.56, which was just above the high directly above F. 

The stock cooperated and didn’t just drop, it plunged. At G the stock 
reached bottom, but Sam didn’t know it at the time (meaning price might have 
continued down). High volume a few days earlier suggested a bottom, but 
that’s an unreliable indicator. The stock at G made a tall candle (with a close 
near the day’s high), which also suggested the stock had put in a bottom. 

The stock was making lower lows nearly every day on the way to G, 
and then it stopped. Price recovered. Why didn’t he cover the short then 
(near G)? 

“Greed,” he said. “Pure and simple. It looked like the stock had put in a 
bottom, but I’ve been fooled before. So I held on.” He shrugged. 

Price rebounded and made a V-shaped turn. When the stock closed above 
overhead trendline resistance (the day before H), he covered his short the next 
day, H, and received a fill of 16.68 for a profit of almost a dollar a share. Had 
he sold at the low at G, he would have made almost $4 a share. But that would 
have been a perfect trade, and those are as rare as fish eating crabs. 


21 


Cup with Handle 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Looks like a cup profile with the handle on the right. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish continuation 
Performance rank 3 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 5% 
Average rise 54% 
Volume trend Downward 
‘Throwbacks 62% 


Percentage meeting price target 61% 


See also Bump-and-run reversal bottom, rounded bottom 


The cup-with-handle pattern looks like, well, a cup with a handle on the 
right. Finding one is more complicated than that, but I simplified the iden- 
tification guidelines to find patterns that are more prolific than the O’Neil 
version and work nearly as well. Several of his guidelines are oriented toward 
trading and not identification, so I exclude them. [ll discuss identification 
guidelines later in this chapter. 

With additional samples, the cup-with-handle pattern has shown good 
performance improvement, moving from a mid-list performer to posting a 


294 


Tour 295 


rank of three in this edition. That’s terrific. This pattern sports a low failure 
rate, too, ranking second where one is best. 

I require at least 150 bear market samples to include in the statistics, 
but I couldn’t find enough cups to qualify. So this chapter only describes bull 
market results. 


Tour 


The cup-with-handle pattern was popularized by William J. O’Neil in his 
book, How to Make Money in Stocks (McGraw-Hill, 1988). Figure 21.1 shows 
an example. The stock climbed 295% in about 2 months (computed from the 
right cup rim to the ultimate high). 

The stock began rising in early August at a price of about 5.50 and climbed 
steadily until it bumped up in early December. Volume, incidentally, was very 
high for the stock at this stage. The stock climbed robustly, then rounded over 
and plunged back through an earlier trendline, completing a bump-and-run 
reversal (BARR) top. 

During the stock’s climb, it reached a high price of 26.88 during late 
December and a low of 12.38 after the BARR top—a loss of 54%. The rise and 
decline formed the left side of the cup. Over the next 2 months, price mean- 
dered upward and pierced the old high during late March. The rise in price to 
the old high completed the right side of the cup. 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD) 


i thi ! i ("| ee 
I It fl i ce 
| , 

| i rg e 


| 
I | ae 


| 
HD 
| | 


-18 


{ 
h i Nyt al} itt L- 


Jun 93 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 21.1 A bump-and-run reversal leads to a cup-with-handle formation. 
Note the price scale as the breakout occurs at about 30 and the stock climbs to 
120 in fewer than 2 months. The cup handle is also a high and tight flag pattern. 


296 Cup with Handle 


Profit-taking stunted the climb and price moved horizontally for almost 
2 weeks before resuming its rise. This movement formed the cup handle (inci- 
dentally, the handle in this pattern is a high, tight flag chart pattern). Vol- 
ume during formation of the handle was down sloping—higher at the start 
and trending lower. When price closed above the right cup rim, a breakout 
occurred. This accompanied a surge in volume that propelled price higher. 
However, a week after the breakout, price threw back to the handle top before 
continuing upward. This throwback allowed nimble traders the opportunity to 
enter new positions or add to existing ones. By late May, just 44 days after the 
breakout, the stock reached the ultimate high of 120. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 21.1 shows the identification guidelines I used to find the cup with 
handle pattern. 

Appearance. Looks like a cup profile with the handle on the right. 

U-shaped cup. Judging whether the cup is V- or U-shaped depends on 
the experience of the person looking at the chart, and to some extent, on the 
software used to display it (the aspect ratio). So it’s an objective interpretation. 
Mostly, I found patterns with rounded turns and removed V-shaped ones (Fig- 
ure 21.5 shows a cup with a rounded turn more V-shaped than I like to see). 
Use the other figures in this chapter as guides. 

Up trend. I don’t recall excluding any cups with price trending down 
(such as an inner cup), but you'll want to see price rising into the start of the 
pattern. O’Neil looks for a 30% rise to the start of the pattern, but that’s a trad- 
ing style and not an identification guideline. If price entered the left cup rim 
from the bottom, then I was happy with that (without the need for a 30% rise). 

Handles. A cup-with-handle without a handle is like peanut butter 
without jelly. I required my cup-with-handle patterns to have a handle. After 


Table 21.1 

Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Looks like a cup profile with the handle on the right. 
U-shaped cup Find U-shaped rounded bottoms and avoid those with a V-shape. 
Up trend Price rises into the start of the cup. 
Handles Cups must have handles. 1 week minimum, forming in upper half 

of pattern. 

Cup rim Cup rims should form near the same price level, but be flexible. 
Breakout direction Upward. 


Duration 7 to 65 weeks. 


Identification Guidelines 297 


cataloging nearly 1,000 of them, I let the statistics determine the size of things, 
such as the handle length. 

The minimum handle length is 1 week with a median length of 22 days. 
I measured the length of the handle as the span from the end of the cup to the 
breakout. The median ignored outlier patterns where price took months to break 
out. Handles shorter than the median associated with better performing cups. 

I also eyeballed the handle to make sure it formed in the upper half 
of the cup. 

Cup rim. I look for the two cup rims to peak near the same price. Some- 
times the handle was above the left cup’s rim, and sometimes it remained below. 
I didn’t want the pattern to look like an ascending or descending scallop, where 
the right side of the cup only reaches halfway up the left side. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction is upward, when price closes 
above the right rim or handle high (whichever is higher). Downward break- 
outs, where price closes below the bottom of the cup, invalidate the pattern. 

Duration. | kept the cup duration to about 15 months or less. 

Figure 21.2 shows another good example of the cup-with-handle pattern 
on the daily scale. The cup gently rounds up and price climbs just beyond the 
left rim before pausing. Price drifts down in the handle, along with a down- 
trending volume pattern before the breakout. Then volume surges and price 
moves upward. Two days after the breakout, price moves marginally lower 
again and enters the region of the right cup rim. After a brief throwback, price 
is soon on its way again. Less than 2 months later, the stock tops out at 15.50 
for a rise of 22%. 


Mentor Graphics (Computers and Peripherals, NASDAQ, MENT) ‘2 
Next Cu 
| ME che oe 1 6 


-15 


fy : 
i MW ; 


Cup Handle 
a 


Prior Cup Handle \ is eB 
ly dlibace | y iy aa gan =e 
to Cup Lip 
lh, 7 iy =v 
| i Miya? I 
lu yl ha ly!" hy , ! i = 
s "1 eu 

Mh al y i Pao | -9 
i - 8 
= 7 

Apr93 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb 


Figure 21.2 A cup-with-handle pattern flanked by other cup-with-handle pat- 
terns. This cup and handle is nicely shaped, with the right cup rim slightly higher 
than the left. 


298 = Cup with Handle 


Figure 21.3 shows a cup-with-handle pattern on the weekly scale. When 
I was searching for cups, I found that weekly scales provide an easy way to 
identify many of the patterns. Of course, I also looked at daily price data to 
refine the weekly patterns and identify new patterns that I may have missed. 

The chart shows an example of a cup-with-handle in which the rise falters 
after rising just 11%. Fortunately, after declining back to the handle base, the 
stock recovers and goes on to form new highs. Ultimately, the stock gains 52%. 

The figure also highlights an inner cup. The left rim sees price trend- 
ing downward into it instead of upward. The handle lasts just 2 weeks, too. 
However, inner cups offer wonderful trading opportunities because they allow 
traders to get in on the ground floor of an impending rise. Even if price only 
rises to the height of the outer left cup rim, the move can be significant. 


Focus on Failures 


Like most chart patterns, cups fail because of the inability of the stock to rise 
by more than 5% before declining. Figure 21.4 shows an example. The nicely 
shaped cup forms after an extended price rise from 33 to 45. The two cup rims 
are at about the same price level. The handle seems to form a small cup of its 
own (but no handle). Price moves up sharply in late September and breaks 
above the right cup rim before continuing higher, but only briefly. The stock 
tops at 47.88, moves horizontally for about 3 weeks, and then starts down. 
‘Two months later, the stock hits a low of 37.63. The rise after the breakout is 


Genetech, Inc (Drug, NYSE, GNE) P 
54 


—50 
~48 
|-46 

4 


Lt if \ 


l 
tn, (| ll i: 
Mul 
a y Me 


Handle 
see ses | ' " 


Inner Cup 


hy pv Mw, il a 


91 A SON D92F MAMJ J ASOND93EMAM] J AS OND94EMAM] J} AS OND 


Figure 21.3. A cup-with-handle pattern on a weekly scale. The failure at 10% to 
15% above the breakout is quite typical for this chart pattern. However, this stock 
recovered and continued upward. 


Statistics 299 


Murphy Oil Corp (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, MUR) 

Cup Handle M, 

{ 

nlf 
h 
| 

h 

fh yd L =a 


Id i" Breakout | =A4 
“ ice 


i | | "| | 


\ ul Lv | 41 
if hyl ulin nly A \ Ih! -40 


Mar 93 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 21.4 Shown is a 5% failure of a cup-with-handle pattern. Although 
price breaks out upward, it moves less than 5% above the cup rim before plung- 
ing downward. 


slightly less than 5%. I classify as a failure a stock that does not continue mov- 
ing higher by more than 5% in the direction of the breakout. 

Why do cups fail? Remember than the failure rate for cups is low, just 
5%, ranking second out of 39 patterns, where one is best (fewest failures). 
That’s a low failure rate (or the other patterns have atrocious failure rates, 
depending on whether you’re a half-glass-full/-empty person). 

The answer to the question is manifold. Overhead resistance can stop 
price from rising. Because cups tend to be long patterns, fundamentals may 
change, which sends the stock crashing. The industry might develop supply 
problems for a main ingredient to a product the company makes (more com- 
mon is price rises for the feedstock). The general market may turn down or 
become a bear market. Anything can happen. Often it’s as simple as the com- 
pany failing to beat earnings estimates. 

Later in the chapter, we’ll see failure rates and discuss them. Let’s 
talk numbers. 


Statistics 


Table 21.2 shows general statistics for cup-with-handle patterns. As I men- 
tioned earlier, I removed bear markets statistics because I didn’t find enough 
examples to be comfortable commenting on them. They might be offended. 


300 =Cup with Handle 


Table 21.2 
General Statistics 

Description Bull Market 
Number found 913 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% C 
Average rise 54% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 14% 

Days to ultimate high 303 

How many change trend? 69% 


Number found. I found 995 cups in 645 stocks with the first cup in 
September 1991 and the most recent in January 2018. Only 913 of those were 
from bull markets, so that’s what I reported on. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, with price 
rising into the pattern and an upward breakout, a continuation of the prevail- 
ing price trend results. 

Average rise. The average rise is yummy, but the median rise (not shown) 
is an earthbound 34%. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. I compared the rise in the index with 
the move from the date of the cup’s breakout to ultimate high. The index 
underperformed the cup-with-handle pattern during the same time period. 

Days to ultimate high. Because the rise is robust, it takes a long time 
for price to reach the ultimate high, about 10 months. The median time is half 
that, though. 

How many change trend? Here’s where the pattern really shines. 
Over two thirds of the patterns will see price rise by more than 20%. Very 
nice, indeed. 

Table 21.3 shows failure rates. Cups show failure rates that climb rapidly 
as the maximum price rises. For example, 5% or 48 patterns see price fail to 
rise more than 5% after the breakout. An additional 68 patterns, combined 
with the prior 48, means 13% will fail to see price rise more than 10% after the 
breakout. Half the patterns will fail to see price rise more than 35%. 

Even though the rise from one row to the next seems big, it’s much better 
than for many other chart patterns. 

Table 21.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, if you don’t have an upward breakout, 
then you’re not looking at a cup with handle. A breakout happens when price 
closes above the right cup rim or handle high. 

Yearly position, performance. When I saw the average rise of 238% for 
patterns within a third of the yearly low, I thought it was a typo. It’s not, but it’s 
based on just five samples. Even the 58% gain uses only 29 samples, so it’s tiny, 
too. Most of the patterns will have breakouts within a third of the yearly high. 


Cumulative Failure Rates 


Statistics 301 


Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market 
5 (breakeven) 48 or 5% 
10 68 or 13% 
15 95 or 23% 
20 71 or 31% 
25 72 or 39% 
30 54 or 45% 
35 53 or 50% 
50 132 or 65% 
75 128 or 79% 
Over 75 192 or 100% 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 12-month low (L), 
middle (M), or high (H) 


Throwback occurrence 


Average time to throwback peaks 

Average time to throwback ends 

Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 


Percentage price resumes trend 


Performance with breakout day gap 
Performance without breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


* Fewer than 30 samples used. 


L 238%*, M 58%*, 
H 52% 


62% 

5% in 6 days 
12 days 
50% 

59% 

85% 


53% 
54% 
$0.56 


Throwback occurrence. Price throws back to the breakout price (or 
comes close to it) almost twice in every three trades. It takes price a dozen days 
to make the round-trip and half that time to see price rise an average of 5% 


(before starting on the return journey). 


Patterns without throwbacks, which see upward momentum work for 
them, perform better than do those with throwbacks. That’s typical behav- 
ior. After a throwback completes, price resumes, rising nearly all of the time, 
except for the stock you own. Doesn’t it seem to work like that? 


302 = Cup with Handle 


Gaps. Cups with breakout day gaps don’t see the kind of boost traders 
expect (only one percentage point between gaps and no gaps). 

Table 21.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Here’s where things get weird. Most patterns see tall patterns 
outperform short ones, but not cups. It’s the reverse. I measured the height 
of the pattern from highest peak to lowest valley and divided by the breakout 
price (the highest peak). If the result was bigger than the median shown in the 
table, then the cup-with-handle pattern was tall. 

Width. Patterns narrower than the median width shown in the table out- 
performed by a substantial amount. Usually wider patterns show a small per- 
formance edge over narrow ones, but not with cups. Width includes both the 
rounded cup and the handle. 

Height and width combinations. We’ve seen that short cups outper- 
form and narrow cups outperform, so you’d expect the combination of short 
and narrow cups, on average, to be the best performers. Nooo! Tall and narrow 
ones do best. Short and narrow places second. In last place are cups both tall 
and wide (which is usually the best performer). 

Table 21.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most of the time, but the result 
is not far from random. Does the trend direction really matter? 

Rising/Falling volume. The answer to the above question is no. The 
performance difference between cups with a rising volume and those with 
receding volume is two percentage points. That’s probably because the pattern 
is so wide that any volume pattern will appear irregular. Linear regression, 
which is what I used to determine the trend, set the record straight, so I didn’t 
have to guess. 


Table 21.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Tall pattern performance 52% 
Short pattern performance 55% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 23.2% 
Narrow pattern performance 61% 
Wide pattern performance 46% 
Median width 174 days 
Short and narrow performance 59% 
Short and wide performance 48% 
Tall and wide performance 45% 


Tall and narrow performance 64% 


Statistics 303 


Table 21.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Volume trend 61% down 
Rising volume trend performance 55% 
Falling volume trend performance 53% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 54% 
Light breakout volume performance 54% 


Breakout volume. Heavy breakout volume? Light breakout volume? 
The cup-with-handle pattern showed no preference in my tests. 

Table 21.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the 
pattern in half and hope it didn’t hurt. I checked how often price returned to 
one (or more) of the locations shown in the table as price made its way to the 
ultimate high. Price returned to the top of the pattern nearly all of the time, so 
a stop-loss order placed there would trigger frequently. 

The middle and bottom of the pattern almost never saw price drop that 
far. Thus a stop placed at either of those locations would work well, except that 
the potential decline might be too large. So do check the drop and see if you 
can tolerate such a loss without having a coronary. 

A handy stop location is below the handle low. I checked it to see how 
well the location worked. A stop placed a penny below the handle low would 
trigger 21% of the time. That sounds a bit high to me, but it will keep the loss 
reasonable (but check that, too). 

Table 21.8 shows the performance over three decades. This table inter- 
ested me because I wanted to see the performance over time (because the cups 
in this new edition perform much better than the ones I found in the second 
edition, which I wrote in the early 2000s). 

Performance over time. Performance has been improving steadily over 
the years. So it’s not my imagination that cups perform better now than the 
ones I looked at 15 years ago. 

Failures over time. I counted how many patterns failed to see price rise 
more than 5%. The failure rates are stable over the three decades. 

Table 21.9 show busted pattern performance. 


Table 21.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Description Bull Market 
Pattern top 82% 
Middle 9% 
Pattern bottom 1% 


Handle low 21% 


304 ~=Cup with Handle 


Table 21.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 49% 
2000s 55% 
2010s 59% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 6% 
2000s 4% 
2010s 5% 
Table 21.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market 
Busted patterns count 95 or 10% 
Single bust count 61 or 64% 
Double bust count 25 or 26% 
Triple+ bust count 9 or 9% 
Performance for all busted patterns -15% 
Single busted performance -21% 
Non-busted performance N/A 


Busted patterns count. Few patterns bust (10%), which is refreshing. 
With some other chart patterns, you need supplemental oxygen because the 
busted count can take your breath away. No so with cups. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted cups by how many times they busted: single, 
double, and more than two (triple+). Most of the busts are single busts. That 
doesn’t surprise me, but with a pattern as tall as a cup with handle (median 
height 23%), I would expect fewer double and triple+ busts than that shown. 
Obviously, some cups struggle to find a trend direction. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Because there is not a cup with 
a downward breakout, I don’t show non-busted performance in the table. 
I only compare single busted patterns with all three varieties, single, double, 
and triple+. The negative sign means price dropped, and it’s a measure of how 
far below the bottom of the cup price falls, on average. 


Trading Tactics 


I show two tables of trading tactics. Let’s begin with the usual one for chart 
patterns, shown in Table 21.10. 


Trading Tactics 305 


Table 21.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height by subtracting the lowest low reached in 
the cup from the high at the right cup rim. Add the difference to the 
high at the right cup rim and the result is the target price. The bottom 
portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 

Buy inner cup _ If you discover a cup within a cup, buy on the breakout of the inner cup 
(when price closes above the inner cup rim). Be prepared to sell at the 
price of the outer left rim. 

Stop location Place a stop-loss order 15 cents below the handle to limit losses. The 
stop will trigger 18% of the time. 


Description Bull Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 84% 
Percentage reaching full height target 64% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 40% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 26% 


Measure rule, targets. The measure rule predicts the price to which the 
stock will rise. The traditional method involves determining the height of the 
pattern from lowest low in the cup to the high at the right cup rim. Adding the 
height to the high at the right cup rim gives the target. 

How often does this work? The bottom portion of the table shows the 
answer, depending on the height used in the calculation. A full height, as 
described above, works 64% of the time. If you take half the height and apply 
it in the same matter, you'll get a closer target. Using two or three times the 
height gives a target farther away, one that price may struggle to reach. 

Once you know the target, measure the distance from the current price to 
the target and change it into a percentage. For example, if the target is 54 and the 
current price is 45, that’s a move of 9/45 or 20%. Page back to Table 21.3 for a 
sanity check. How often will price fail to rise more than 20%? Answer: 31%. So 
you have a probability of making money 69% of the time, and that’s if you trade 
it perfectly (and it behaves like the cups I looked at. If I didn’t look at them, would 
they behave better or worse? That’s like saying Heisenberg may have slept here). 

Figure 21.5 (weekly scale) is an example of the measure rule in practice. 
Compute the cup height by taking the difference between the right cup high 
(point A at 19) and the cup low (point B at 10). Add the difference (9) to the 
right cup rim to get the price target (28). Mid-May sees price hit the target but 
plummet the following week. 

A more conservative price target uses half the formation height. This 
method gives a target of just 23.50, reached during early July. The stock climbs 
to the nearer target quickly and without the severe declines experienced on the 
way to the more risky, higher price target. 


306 = =Cup with Handle 


Buy inner cup. Figure 21.5 also shows an inner cup. If you are going 
to trade this chart pattern and can identify an inner cup, buy it. An inner cup 
appears as two widely spaced minor highs that are at about the same price 
level. You score as the stock advances to the old high (the price of the outer, 
left cup rim) and further if the outer cup-with-handle pattern succeeds with 
an upward breakout. Playing the inner cup shown in Figure 21.5 would have 
boosted profits about $2 a share or 12%. 

Stop location. Once you initiate a trade, place a stop-loss order 15 cents 
below the handle low (note Table 21.7 places the stop a penny below the han- 
dle, so the stop trigger slightly more often). The handle is a place of support 
and sometimes declines will stop at that point. Placing a stop just below the 
handle low will get you out of those situations when the stock continues tum- 
bling. However, price will trigger the stop an average of 18% of the time, so 
you'll have to decide if that’s the right location or not. 

Table 21.11 shows special features based on the cup-with-handle pat- 
tern. I played with handles and rims and checked performance. 

Handle height. I measured how far down the handle price dropped 
below the right rim (7% median), and then compared the performance of 
those patterns with tall or short declines. Cup patterns with short handles out- 
performed those with tall handles. In other words, if price does not retrace far 
in the handle, performance improves. 

Handle length. I measured the duration of the handle from the right rim 
to the breakout and found the median was 22 calendar days. Handles shorter 
than the median saw performance better than patterns with wider handles. 

Higher rim. I separated cups into those with higher right rims and those 
with higher left rims. Those with higher right rims performed better after 
the breakout. 


Table 21.11 

Special Features 
Description Bull Market 
Tall handle 51% 
Short handle 56% 
Median handle drop below right rim 7% 
Narrow handles 56% 
Wide handles 51% 
Median width 22 days 
Higher left rim 51% 


Higher right rim 55% 


Experience 307 


Experience 


The following describes some of my experience with the cup-with-han- 
dle pattern. 


Rowan Companies 


In December 2006 and into May 2007, Rowan Companies (RDC) formed 
a cup with handle that also looked like a double bottom. I had a buy stop 
placed 2 cents above the top of the handle. The day it broke out was the 
day I bought. 

From my notebook: “Buy reason: cup with handle/rounding turn in hot 
industry. Every chart pattern is a sell [did I mean duy?] signal, and so I’m going 
to take this one. The upside will be 44, so I stand to make $5 per share on the 
trade if all works as planned. Downside is stopped out at the volatility stop set- 
ting of 35.45. Yuck. At an entry price of 39.11, downside is 12% and that’s too 
far. Let’s keep the stop loss at 10% so that would make the stop 35.20. Upside 
is 13%. Nota large ratio. . . Yesterday I didn’t feel good about this trade so I 
called it off. Today, I’m looking to buy something in a hot industry. Sounds like 
this trade is going to be a dud. . .” 

The stock climbed a wall of worry in a series of steps. Perhaps it was me 
worrying. Six weeks later, I wrote this: “Sell reason: Yesterday I noticed that 
many stocks in the industry and the other oil industries had topped out and 
were heading down. I did a survey and found that 11 of 14 in the oil field, 9 of 
10 in the integrated petroleum field, and 6 out of 6 in the producing field were 
trending down. That’s 26 out of 30. I can’t expect Rowan to buck against such 
a trend. It’s time to take my gain and exit as best I can.” 

I made 6% on the trade, about half of what I expected. If I wasn’t fright- 
ened out of the stock and held on until it peaked, it would have reached my 44 
target and kept going up to 46.16. If I sold at the peak, I would have made 18%. 
But selling at the peak would have represented a perfect trade. 


¢ Lesson: Not all cups with handles see big gains (median rise is 34%). 
¢ Lesson: This trade would have benefited (slightly) by using a trailing 
stop placed a penny below the prior day’s low. 


I was proactive in this trade by looking at other stocks in this industry and 
similar industries but that turned out to be a mistake. It forced me out of the 
trade almost a month too soon. 


¢ Lesson: Watch other stocks in the same industry for insights of how 
your trade may unfold. 


308 =Cup with Handle 


EMC Corp. 


After a nice rise from 9 to 15, EMC Corp. (EMC) formed the left lip of a cup 
with handle at the start of 2005. The cup completed the right handle in June. 
The bottom would have looked at like a complex-head-and-shoulders bottom 
(multiple heads) if price didn’t spike downward for 2 days in April. 

Here’s my notebook: “Buy reason: A perfect cup with handle. I’m buy- 
ing before confirmation because I feel strongly about this one. On the weekly 
chart, the Jan 2005 peak pokes through a long-term down trendline. If this 
stock can finally push through that resistance, the sky’s the limit. I might buy 
more if that happens. Score +3 for 18.19 target. Only 2 problems: a weak mar- 
ket and lack of confirmation yet. Before the open on 7 July 2005, terrorists 
exploded four bombs in London. I thought that would cause the stock to gap 
lower on the open and then recover through the day. It turns out I was right as 
I gota fill (14.22) much lower than yesterday’s close (14.48).” 

A week later, I was out. “Sell reason: I believe this has formed a lower 
high. That suggests a short-term trend change. Since I have a profit, I thought 
I'd cash out now and wait for it to go down, then recover. When it breaks out 
of the long-term down trendline, then it might be worth another look.” 

I made 2% on the trade, but it was a good thing I sold. The stock tum- 
bled and broke out downward from the cup pattern, bottoming at 9.44 or 35% 
below where I sold. My instincts on this trade were good. 


¢ Lesson: Sometimes when price fails to follow through to a new high, it 
means a trend change. 


CNO Financial 


This trade was a mistake. CNO Financial (CNO) started forming a cup with 
handle in October 2009. In March 2010, the stock completed building the right 
rim. Then it went to work on the handle. It completed the handle in the mid- 
dle of April when I bought. “Buy reason: Possible cup with handle, good profit 
potential for a long-term hold (3x) [triple my investment] and only own 3% of 
this. I wanted to spend some of the $ I have collecting almost no interest.” 

The word “Possible” is a warning. The cup never broke out upward, at 
least not before I bought. The stock retraced its gains, dropped as low as 12 
cents above the bottom of the cup, and recovered. 

During July 2010, I worried over the stock. “5 July. I don’t know what to 
do with this stock. I can see it going down to 2. One insider bought at $5.94, 
41k shares, and the stock is about a buck lower. If this breaks support at 4.18, 
then it’s a sell. I put a [conditional order] to sell at 4.13, until 6 September 
2010. The price is just below the low in February.” 

From 7 July to a week later, I raised the stop almost daily. “I am canceling 
the stop because the market wants to go higher and this still has great upside 
potential.” 


Sample Trade 309 


The stock formed another cup throughout 2010, another in 2011-2012, 
and finally broke out upward in the summer of 2012. 

The stock moved higher, not a straight-line run upward, but a nice climb 
nonetheless. My notes to the buy said the stock targets were 8, 10, 17, and 
20. I bought at 6.52, and when the stock started moving up, it was at about 
8.50 (it had pierced the resistance at 8). The stock paused at 10 (as predicted), 
blew past 17 to reach 19 where it retraced, and moved sideways with a floor 
of about 16. 

Fast forward to 26 September 2015. “Sell reason: Diversification. Zacks 
says the company is overloaded with debt, and another broker report says debt 
is above industry average. If this stock should DCB [dead-cat bounce], it would 
be a tragedy, but it only makes up 8% of my portfolio. Nonetheless, it’s time to 
sell a bit. The stock hasn’t done anything since 2014, so maybe it’s time to find 
something that will do well going forward.” 

I made 195% on the trade, almost the triple I was looking for. 


¢ Lesson: Sometimes mistakes turn out well. 

¢ Lesson: If a stock isn’t performing as expected, consider selling but 
also recognize that stocks need time to regroup before moving higher, 
especially after sharp gains. 


Sample Trade 


Cody is in high school. He is not sure what he wants to do for a living, but 
he still has a few years to figure it out before he graduates. When he is not 
chasing cheerleaders, he either has his nose buried in the financial websites or 
is reviewing charts on the computer screen. His interest in stocks follows in 
his father’s footsteps: The man works for a brokerage firm and taught Cody 
the ropes. 

Although Cody does not belong to the investment club at school, he pals 
around with the players. One day, he overheard them talking about the stock 
pictured in Figure 21.5. At first he did not think much about it until he looked 
deeper. That is when he saw a cup-with-handle pattern. 

He was not convinced the stock was a good trade, and did not have the 
money to buy it anyway. He decided to paper trade it to see what he could 
learn. On the daily time scale, he saw an inner cup forming at point C, so that 
is the one he decided to trade. 

Week after week, he waited for the buy signal that did not come. Even- 
tually, the stock climbed above the right cup rim but he missed it. When he 
pulled up the stock chart on his computer, a throwback had already occurred. 
So he waited for price to climb above the cup rim again. 

That happened on 9 May, his girlfriend’s birthday. Sensing a positive 
omen, he made a notation to buy the stock, on paper, at the closing price the 
following day (filled at 15.25). When he met his girlfriend the next day, she 


310 Cup with Handle 


Telxon Corp (Electronics, NASDAQ, TLXN) 


- Price —— | ~ 28 


Improved Target Price — i al ih ' | | ie; - 2 
Outer Cup with Handle / WA Me ie | 
- HA 
i c | - I= 
| I 7 
i | fH tiny ltt setae ER 
| | | i 7 Formation ee 
| 


u 


, allay; 


iyi Ith) B 


I Inner Cup with Handle | 


Po 


93 MJ] | ASOND94EMAM] J AS ONDISEMAM]J AS OND96EMAM] J 


Figure 21.5 Here is an example of the measure rule in practice on the weekly 
scale. Trade the inner cup-with-handle formation for a better entry price. 


was not impressed with the birthday present he gave her, and the stock closed 
lower as well. 

‘Two weeks later, the stock was moving up. Cody placed his stop 15 cents 
below the handle low, at 14.38 (point D, which also marks the purchase point). 
When the stock climbed above the outer cup, he raised the stop to 17.50. 
Then he noticed a problem forming: a right-angled broadening top formation. 
“It was a bearish signal, so I raised my stop to just below the base at 20.25.” 

Then he waited. 

He got word that the stock was in trouble from his pals. They were not 
too happy with the company for some reason. When he pulled the stock up 
on his computer screen, he noticed that it had hit his stop in late August when 
price momentarily dipped. Cody whipped out his calculator and tallied up his 
gains. He made $5 a share for a gain of over 30%. He chuckled to himself that 
next time he would use his paper profits to buy his girl something other than 
cubic zirconium. 


22 


Cup with Handle, Inverted 
Wt 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Price follows the shape of an inverted cup followed by a handle. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term bearish 
bearish reversal continuation 
Performance rank 6 out of 36 7 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 18% 9% 
Average decline 17% 23% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 67% 60% 
Percentage meeting 62% 62% 
price target 
See also Rounding tops 


‘To find this pattern, I had two things to work with: a picture of an ideal- 
ized inverted cup from a website and one line of text describing it. That was 
enough. I searched through my databases for the pattern, created some identi- 
fication guidelines, and then gathered statistics. The pattern performed better 
than I expected. 

As the accompanying Results Snapshot shows, in bear markets the pat- 
tern has a 9% breakeven failure rate—ranking tenth out of 19 (not shown). 


311 


312 Cup with Handle, Inverted 


The average decline is 23%, a good showing for a bearish pattern. The per- 
formance ranks are even better. They are close to the best performance (a 
rank of one). 

The percentage meeting price target is based not on the height of the 
pattern, but on the height of the handle to boost the success rate. Subtract the 
handle’s height from the right cup rim to get a target. 

Let’s whip out our magnifying glasses for a closer look. 


Tour 


Figure 22.1 shows an example of an inverted cup-with-handle pattern (icup). 
The pattern looks like a rounded top but includes a handle on the right side 
of the pattern. This particular handle is narrow and tall, retracing (from A to 
B) a significant portion of the decline from the top of the pattern to the right 
cup rim (point A). Price continues dropping, confirming the pattern as a valid 
one when it closes below the right rim. The figure shows price gapping lower 
(breakaway gap) on high volume, but do not expect such behavior. Once the 
icup confirms, price drops but usually not as steeply as that shown. 


Airborne Freight (Air Transport, NYSE, ABF) 


LV (ty 
Ws 


Inverted Cup Handle - 20 


- 11 
91 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 22.1 An inverted cup-with-handle pattern appears along with dome- 
shaped volume. The handle retraces the decline by rising from A to B, and then 
price moves lower before gapping below the right cup rim, confirming the 
pattern as valid. 


Identification Guidelines 313 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 22.1 shows identification guidelines for icups. Refer to Figure 22.2 as 
I discuss them. 


Table 22.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price follows the shape of an inverted cup followed by a handle. 
Rounded cup Look for a smooth, rounded cup, but accept deviations. 
Cup rims The starting and ending points of the cup should stop near the same 


price, usually less than a few percentage points apart. 
Cup handle Between the right cup rim and the breakout is the handle. It can be any 
length. The median is 30 days long. 


Cup retrace Price in the handle must not climb above the top of the pattern but 
should bounce upward. The three most frequent retrace amounts 
land between 30% and 40%. 


Breakout Downward when price closes below the right cup rim. 
direction 
Confirmation The pattern is valid only after a downward breakout. 


JDS Uniphase Corp. (Precision Instrument, NASDAQ, JDSU) 


lat | -11 


"yA j 

\| if ca 
| ft 

| | i i ; 


- 10 


‘ 1 i i ul 
| l| | i i) 


| ok 
"i 
-9 
Vil ty 
mh 


ly yO ag 
\ ny) I 

y | vay 

lh i 


| Inverted Cup I Handle 


lh ] 
| 


i 


A 


hy Ih 
MW : 


-3 


01 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 02 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 22.2 This inverted cup has a V-shape and a handle that mirrors the 
cup’s shape. 


314 Cup with Handle, Inverted 


Appearance. Imagine a teacup flipped upside-down with the handle on 
the right. That’s what an icup pattern looks like. 

Rounded cup. I did not check the performance of rounded cups versus 
V-shaped ones. However, I tried to limit my selections to the rounded shape. 
I consider Figure 22.2 to have the V-shape (but used it in the study anyway) 
and the other figures in this chapter to be rounded-looking. You may find it 
easier to picture an inverted teacup or coffee cup in your mind as you search 
for the pattern. 

Cup rims. The cup rims are points A and B in the figure. Few patterns I 
looked at had the same price across the rims. Price in the bottom of the pattern 
varied by a median of 2%. 

Cup handle. I define the cup handle as the price movement from the 
right cup rim to the breakout (that is, until price closes below the level of the 
right cup rim). In the figure, the handle is from point B until almost May. The 
handle length is a median of 30 days, so that gives you some idea of how long 
handles can be. Expect variations. 

Cup retrace. I followed two rules: (1) the handle could not rise above the 
cup top, and (2) there must be at least some rise—a bounce to the stock after 
the right rim hits bottom. The most common retrace is listed in the table. That 
is, price climbed up a portion of the cup (during creation of the handle) before 
returning to the breakout. 

Breakout direction. You must wait for the breakout with this pattern 
before trading. Too many of the patterns I looked at had price moving upward 
instead of downward, especially in bull markets. A breakout is a close below 
point B, the lowest low on the right rim. 

Confirmation. The pattern confirms when price closes below the right 
rim (stages a downward breakout). 

Figure 22.3 shows another example of an inverted cup-with-handle. 
This icup has uneven rims and a top that is really an Eve & Eve double top 
chart pattern with a diamond bottom (not highlighted) nestled between those 
two peaks. 

The inverted cup makes a gentle swing upward from A to B. Points A and 
B are 9% apart in price. That is wider than I like to see, but I consider it a valid 
icup. The handle forms a second bump well below the main cup, but this one 
has an irregular shape. 


Focus on Failures 


What do failures look like, and what causes them? Figure 22.4 shows one type 
of failure—an identification failure. The cup appears in an upward price trend, 
suggesting it will act as a reversal after a downward breakout. The cup itself 
is rounded with rims that bottom 5% apart in price. That is close enough for 


Focus on Failures 315 


Crane Company (Diversified Co., NYSE, CR) 


ae Eve 
pay i al - 28 
ey "Wy 


| 
hy, fy 
i) I | 


ky 
tt | al 
th i" 


{ 
th Hy | - 25 


Lathh og 
ree 1h dul 
| 


- 22 
| - 21 
[|___rverte cup sth ante, inl - 20 


ae 
) Mf 18 
-17 


- 16 


Jan 02 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 
Figure 22.3 This inverted cup-with-handle has uneven rims and U-shaped 


volume. 


Dekalb Genetics (Food Processing, NYSE, DKB) 


Hi 


‘ ‘i 
1, fy. ith, | Vt : 
A io Wim 
hi Hy | - 
I" 
Mi 231 
|e - 27 


id 
hi =25 
hw Inverted Cup Handle, 33 


\ |! ! i! 
‘rr lull 
jul hy I 


96 Dec Jan 97 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 22.4 This is not an inverted cup-with-handle because price fails to 
close below the right cup rim and confirm the pattern. The breakout is upward, 
not downward. 


316 = Cup with Handle, Inverted 


government work, as the saying goes. The pattern qualifies as an icup with one 
glaring exception. Do you know what it is? 

As you probably guessed, the breakout is upward (it should be down- 
ward). Had you shorted the stock in the handle, you would be looking at a 
loss. The image is a glaring example of why you should wait for the breakout, 
especially when considering a short sale. 

Figure 22.5 shows the next example of a failed trade. Running through 
the identification guidelines, the price trend leading to the pattern is flat, but 
that’s okay. The cup is rounded with rims at the same price. The handle has an 
upward bounce that measures 61%, close to the Fibonacci retrace of 62%. The 
breakout is downward, as required by the guidelines. However, price drops just 
3% before rebounding. 

What happened? 

Looking back on the weekly scale shows extensive support and resistance 
beginning in mid-1999 (not shown) and lasting for a year at 6.50. That price is 
also where the rim of the icup formed. When the downward breakout occurred, 
price ran into stiff support and stopped declining 3% below the breakout. 

This is a good example of how important stops are when trading short. 
After opening a short position, place a stop just above the prior minor high or 
above a nearby resistance zone. Do not place it too close or you will be stopped 
out on normal price volatility. Using a stop would have saved a trader from an 
embarrassing loss. 


Triarc Cos, Inc. A (Restaurant, NYSE, TRY) 


i h 
aii 


lq 
wily it Inverted Cup Handle 


01 Nov Dec Jan02 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 22.5 A large flat base before the start of the cup supported price and 
stopped the decline. 


Statistics 317 


Why do these patterns fail? No one knows for sure and the reason varies 
from pattern to pattern. A good earnings report, one that beats expectations, 
will send a stock higher. Other fundamental factors such as good same-store 
sales, the win of a new contract, or even a takeover bid by another company 
will stop a decline. 


Statistics 


Table 22.2 shows general statistics for icups. 

Number found. I found the first pattern using data from August 1991 
to November 2017 in 591 stocks and catalogued 944 patterns. Not all stocks 
covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. In bull markets a slight 
majority act as reversals of the upward trend. In bear markets, the pattern acts 
as continuation patterns half again as often as reversals. 

Reversal/continuation performance. The performance difference 
between icups acting as reversals and continuations is minor: two percentage 
points in bull markets and no difference in bear markets. Statistical differences 
of a percentage point or two are common for downward breakouts in all 
pattern types. 

Average decline. The performance of this pattern is above the averages 
posted by other bearish chart pattern types. That’s why the performance rank 
is as low as it is (low is good). 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. You can see how the general market 
influenced the average decline. In bull markets, it helped the decline but only 
marginally. In bear markets, it helped dramatically, or so the theory says. 

Days to ultimate low. I checked the velocity of the decline in bull and 
bear markets and found that price dropped 2.5 times as fast in bear markets as 
in bull ones. Trade with the trend (downward in bear markets). 


Table 22.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 
Reversal, continuation performance 


Average decline 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change 
Days to ultimate low 


How many change trend? 


556 

55% R, 45% C 
-16% R, -18% C 
-17% 

-1% 

63 

35% 


388 

39% R, 61% C 
-23% R, -23% C 
-23% 

-11% 

34 

57% 


318 Cup with Handle, Inverted 


How many change trend? Values above 50% are terrific for upward 
breakouts, but they are very rare for downward breakouts. And yet we see that 
57% of icups in bear markets see price drop more than 20% (a trend change). 
That’s exceptionally good. Even the bull market drop beats the average of 28%. 

Table 22.3 shows failure rates for icups. I found that in bear markets 
just 9% of the icups failed to see price drop more than 5% after the break- 
out. As you scan down the list, notice that failure rates skyrocket. Twenty-one 
percent will fail to see price drop more than 10%. That’s double the prior row’s 
failure rate. 

The bull market numbers for the first two rows are double the bear mar- 
ket rates. Half (52%) will fail to see price drop more than 15%. If you want to 
make money trading this pattern, then concentrate on finding it and trading it 
in bear markets. 

Table 22.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is downward from the 
icup. The breakout occurs when price closes below the right cup rim. 

Yearly position, performance. Does performance change depending 
on where in the yearly price range the breakout occurs? The answer seems 
to be that the lower the breakout appears in the yearly price range, the bet- 
ter the performance. That’s clear in bull markets, but bear markets muddle 
the numbers. 

Pullbacks. A pullback occurs between 60% and 67% of the time, on 
average. During the average pullback, price drops 5% to 9% below the break- 
out in 6 days before returning to (or coming close to) the breakout price for a 
round-trip of 12 days. 

When a pullback occurs, performance suffers. You can see the effect in 
the table. Look for nearby support zones—regions that might repel the down- 
ward move before taking a position in the stock. 


Table 22.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 98 or 18% 34 or 9% 
10 122 or 40% 48 or 21% 
15 67 or 52% 47 or 33% 
20 80 or 66% 38 or 43% 
25 51 or 75% 58 or 58% 
30 42 or 83% 46 or 70% 
35 34 or 89% 37 or 79% 
50 51 or 98% 65 or 96% 
75 11 or 100% 14 or 100% 


Over 75 0 or 100% 1 or 100% 


Statistics 319 


Table 22.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-19%, M-14%, L-23%, M -23%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H -7% H 0% 
Pullback occurrence 67% 60% 
Average time to pullback bottoms —5% in 6 days -9% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -15% -21% 
Average decline for patterns without pullbacks -21% -26% 
Percentage price resumes trend 61% 48% 
Performance with breakout day gap -17% -25% 
Performance without breakout day gap -17% -23% 
Average gap size $0.83 $0.87 
Table 22.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -18% -23% 
Short pattern performance -16% -23% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 28.8% 44.2% 
Narrow pattern performance -17% -23% 
Wide pattern performance -17% -23% 
Median width 134 days 139 days 
Short and narrow performance -17% -22% 
Short and wide performance -15% -23% 
Tall and wide performance -18% -23% 
Tall and narrow performance -18% -24% 


Gaps. Icups with gaps show improved performance after the breakout, 
but only in bear markets. 

Table 22.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones, but the perfor- 
mance is marginal and it applies only to bull markets. To use this observation, 
compute the formation height by taking the difference between the top of the 


320 Cup with Handle, Inverted 


icup and the lower of the two rims and then dividing the height by the price 
of the right rim low. If the result is higher than the median shown in the table, 
then the pattern is tall. Otherwise, it’s short. 

Width. I didn’t see any performance difference after sorting the pat- 
terns by width. 

Height and width combinations. Tall patterns perform better than 
short ones, but the differences aren’t substantial. 

Table 22.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

As you scan down the table, notice that the performance difference is 
minor, regardless of which category you are looking at. Thus, volume is not a 
good predictor of performance of the icup, at least for the samples I used in the 
study. Bear markets show no performance difference at all. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most often, but the results are 
about random. Don’t throw away a pattern just because volume trends upward. 

Rising/Falling volume. Patterns with falling volume in bull markets 
tend to see price decline a bit more than for their rising-volume counterparts. 

Breakout day volume. Light breakout day volume helps performance 
(bull market only), but the performance boost is negligible. Market lore says 
heavy breakout day volume helps performance, but we don’t see that here, nor 
in some other chart pattern types. 

Table 22.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. You can use 
these numbers to help locate where a stop-loss order should be placed to pro- 
tect profit and limit losses. 


Table 22.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 52% down 53% down 
Rising volume trend performance -16% -23% 
Falling volume trend performance -18% -23% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -17% -23% 
Light breakout volume performance -18% -23% 

Table 22.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 0% 0% 
Middle 9% 3% 
Pattern bottom 78% 72% 


Handle high 11% 6% 


Statistics 321 


I checked how far price climbed after a downward breakout on the way 
to the ultimate low. I did find one pattern in a bull market that made it back 
to the top of the icup, but it didn’t make an impact on the numbers shown 
(0% shown). 

If you place a stop order at the top of the highest peak in the handle, your 
stop will be triggered between 6% and 11% of the time on average as price 
searches for the ultimate low. You can see the hit rates for other locations in 
the pattern. 

Table 22.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. Because bear markets only occurred in the 
2000s, the numbers are not included in the table. The 2010s showed the best 
performance for icups and the 2000s showed the worst. 

Failures over time. As one might expect, failures were highest in the 
2000s and lowest in the 2010s. That makes intuitive sense because perfor- 
mance was worst in the 2000s (more failures) and best in the 2010s (fewer 
failures). 

Table 22.9 shows busted pattern performance. 


Table 22.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -17% 
2000s -16% 
2010s -19% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 18% 
2000s 20% 
2010s 14% 

Table 22.9 

Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 163 or 29% 39 or 10% 
Single bust count 143 or 88% 31 or 79% 
Double bust count 5 or 3% 1 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 15 or 9% 7 or 18% 
Performance for all busted patterns 47% 54% 
Single busted performance 53% 67% 
Non-busted performance N/A N/A 


322 Cup with Handle, Inverted 


Busted patterns count. The icup pattern has comparatively few busted 
patterns, especially in bear markets. 

Busted occurrence. Of the patterns which bust, most of them are single 
busted patterns, but notice that triple busted patterns (triple+, which means 
busted more than twice) place second. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Because icups only break out 
downward, there are no non-busted icups to compare the results to. Single 
busted patterns perform better than one, two, and triple+ (combined). 


Trading Tactics 


Table 22.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. To get the measure rule to give good success 
rates, I decided to use the height in the handle subtracted from the right rim 
low as a target. Ignore values below zero and convert the height as a percentage 


Table 22.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Compute the handle height (not cup height), then subtract it from 


the price of the right rim low. The bottom portion of the table 
shows how often the measure rule works. 


Head-and-shoulders Look to the left of the cup to see if another handle appears. If so, this 
might be a head-and-shoulders top with handles as shoulders. 

Open short When price closes below the right rim low, short the stock. Only 
experienced traders should short a stock. 

Close short If price declines quickly, several points in a few days (almost vertical), 


consider closing the short position. Price usually rebounds after 
such quick declines (forming V-bottoms, a chart pattern). 


Trendline Draw a trendline down from the handle. When price closes above 
the trendline, cover your short. 

Measured The handle may be the corrective phase of a measured move down. 
move down Sell when price nears the amount of the first leg decline. 

Stop location See Table 22.7 for hints on where to place a stop-loss order. 

Busted trade See Table 22.9 for guidance. 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 

Percentage reaching half height target 83% 81% 

Percentage reaching full height target 62% 62% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 36% 31% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 20% 19% 


Trading Tactics 323 


of the right rim low to see if the projected decline is reasonable. Use Table 22.3 
to determine the chance of price declining that far. 

For example, suppose the handle price peaks at 20 and the breakout (the 
low at the right cup rim) is at 17. Subtract the difference, 3, from the right 
cup rim, 17, to get the target price of 14. A drop of 3 points in a $17 stock is a 
drop of 18%, which sounds reasonable. However, Table 22.3 shows that in bull 
markets, about 60% of stocks will fail to see price drop that far. 

The lower portion of the Table 22.10 shows how often various heights 
change the success rate. Using the full height like I did in the example, price 
will reach the target 62% of the time, on average. Of course, your mile- 
age may vary. 

Head-and-shoulders. Look to the left of the cup to see if another handle 
looks like the one on the right. If so, then you may have a head-and-shoulders 
top. Consult the head-and-shoulders top chapter for more information on 
trading that chart pattern. 

Open short. This reminds me of the time I tested my new circuit 
board for the Patriot air defense system. Each time I applied power to the 
board, the breaker tripped. I discovered that the layout people wired power to 
ground. Oops. 

When price closes below the right rim low, open a short position. Be sure 
to use a stop or other method to exit the stock in case price rises. 

Close short. If price drops quickly—a straight-line run of several points 
in a few days—consider closing out your short when price stops declining. 
Sometimes the snapback rally sees price rebound quickly. 

Trendline. Another exit method is to draw a trendline down the right 
side of the cup, touching the top of the handle and extended lower. After a 
downward breakout, the slope of the decline will usually be steeper than the 
slope of that trendline (so price drops below the line). When price closes above 
the trendline, exit the trade. 

If price forms a new trend downward, one steeper than the cup-to-handle 
trendline, draw a new down-sloping trendline along price peaks. When price 
closes above the new trendline, close out the position. 

Measured move down. Look for a measured move down chart pattern. 
In some cases, the handle is the corrective phase of a measured move. If the 
second leg of the pattern mirrors the length or the first leg, be ready to close 
out the short. See the measured move down chart pattern for details. 

Stop location. Consult Table 22.7 to see if placing a stop above the han- 
dle might work as a stop location. Before placing a trade, convert the potential 
loss into a percentage to see if you can tolerate the loss. 

Busted trade. Icups that bust tend to make large moves upward during 
recovery. Irading a busted pattern might make more sense than trying eke out 
a small profit from shorting. 


324 Cup with Handle, Inverted 


Sample Trade 


Sam, short for Samantha, works as a blackjack dealer in Las Vegas. She takes 
the money earned from tips and invests it in the stock market. In the decade 
since she started tossing cards, she has built a tidy nest egg. Figure 22.6 shows 
an inverted cup-with-handle dealt her and how she traded it. 

The first thing Sam did was to qualify the pattern. Did it meet the iden- 
tification guidelines listed in Table 22.1? Quickly running through them, we 
find that the cup looked rounded with rims uneven but not too far apart in 
price. The handle showed a distinct bump up (in May) but some distance 
away from the cup. She did not know if this made any difference. The handle 
retraced 69% back toward the high at A. 

Patiently, she counted cards until the odds stacked in her favor. “When 
price closed below the right cup lip, I shorted the stock at 7.90. The following 
day’s tall trading range bothered me, but the close was in the middle of the 
intraday range, so it was not a one-day reversal. Fortunately.” 

Price eased down each day (but not quickly enough to suggest a sale), 
attempted a pullback at the start of July, but soon continued lower. 

After a few weeks, “I drew a trendline down,” as shown in the figure. 

“I measured the cup height and handle height as a kind of target window 
[both subtracted from the right rim low] but found that price had declined 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD) 


A -11 
Hah al 
hy Pa V fy " Fi - 10 
ky | i! M ; Hl unl 2 
iy fu Af hy, Shorted im hy 
I Inverted Cup Handle |, | 8 
|! Covered | ' 


B 


-7 


Cup Target 6 


- 4 
Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 22.6 As described in the Sample Trade, Samantha traded this inverted 
cup-with-handle by drawing a down-sloping trendline as a sell trigger. A stop-loss 
order closed out her position automatically, though. 


Sample Trade 325 


below the window. So I placed a stop-loss order at 6.10, a few cents above the 
brief pause in mid-July” [the “Cup Target” in the figure points to just above 
her stop price]. 

After her shift ended each night at the casino, she logged onto the Web 
and updated her chart. When price jumped upward in late July, the stop took 
her out at 6.10. She made about 22% after commissions. 


23 


Diamond Bottoms 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Diamond pattern forms after a downward price trend. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 

Breakeven failure rate 

Average rise 

Volume trend 

Throwbacks 

Percentage meeting price target 


See also 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average drop 

Volume trend 

Pullbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


326 


Long-term bullish reversal 
27 out of 39 

13% 

39% 

Downward 

52% 

73% 


Diamond tops 


Short-term bearish consolidation 


1 (best) out of 36 
15% 

19% 

Downward 

67% 

55% 


Tour 327 


How is a diamond bottom like asking a girl out on a date? When dealing 
with either, it’s all in the approach. Diamond bottoms have price entering the 
pattern from the top (heading down); diamond tops have price entering from 
the bottom, trending up. What more is there to know? Plenty, and the Results 
Snapshot just scratches the surface. 

Based on what we see in the Results Snapshot, diamonds favor downward 
breakouts. They show the best performance of any chart pattern, but upward 
breakouts are closer to the worst performance. Breakeven failure rates (a 
measure of how often price fails to move more than 5% after the breakout) 
are close to one another, with downward breakouts suffering a bit more than 
upward breakouts. 

Pull out a loupe and let’s take a closer look at this chart pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 23.1 shows an example of what a diamond bottom looks like. Notice 
that price trends downward into the pattern, the diamond appears, and then 
price reverses in this example. Price dropping into the pattern from the top 
means it is a diamond bottom and not a top. [ignore any overshoot and under- 
shoot in the week or two before the pattern begins. Overshoot and undershoot 
are like having a pullback or throwback precede the start of the pattern. See 
the Glossary for an example of overshoot or undershoot. 

The diamond bottom begins with price tracing higher highs and lower lows, 
then the process reverses. The price range narrows until the breakout occurs. 


Coors, Adolph Co. (Beverage (Alcoholic), NASDAQ, ACCOB) 24 


n'| : 


I, | 
| Mh, ! ” “3 
Me ' 


- 20 


-19 


It 
\ 
fo , hl Wi 
\ 


Throwback - 18 


Jul 91 Au Se Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 
9g p 


Figure 23.1 A diamond bottom reversal. Volume typically recedes through the 
formation until the breakout day. This is a two-diagonal diamond. 


328 Diamond Bottoms 


Volume throughout the chart pattern is diminishing. The breakout usu- 
ally sports a significant rise in volume. The figure shows high volume on the 
breakout when price gaps through the diamond trendline boundary. (There 
are three gaps along the upward breakout trend. The first is a breakaway gap, 
the middle one when price pierces the top trendline is a continuation gap, and 
an exhaustion gap ends the uptrend). In less than 3 months, the stock climbs 
over 20% to a high of 22.25. 

A diamond bottom represents the struggle between buyers and sellers. 
Buying demand pushes price up to a new minor high until selling pressure 
forces price back down. If selling pressure is strong enough, price drops to a new 
minor low. The widening pattern continues, but usually not for many swings. 

On the right half of the diamond, greedy holders—seeing a good price 
for the stock—sell, and the price rise stops, turns around, and drops. Sell- 
ers buy but do so before price makes a new low. They are excited about the 
stock and buy in before price can reverse and leave them without a position. 
This activity blunts the downward momentum and creates a higher minor low. 
Thus, price begins narrowing on the right side of the diamond. 

Eventually, one of the warring parties will win, and overwhelming buying 
demand or selling pressure will cause price to break out of the diamond pattern. 
Price continues in the breakout direction until it pauses several points beyond the 
diamond boundary. For upward breakouts, the pause may be frightening enough 
that holders sell, driving the price back to the diamond trendline (a throwback). 

For downward breakouts, buying demand from traders believing they 
are getting the stock at fire-sale prices creates a pullback. The smart money 
knows the score and takes the last opportunity to dump their holdings. This 
additional selling pressure forces the stock down again, usually for quite some 
time (weeks to months). 

That is the life of a diamond. 


Identification Guidelines 


How do you identify a diamond bottom? Review the identification character- 
istics shown in Table 23.1. 

The hardest part of identifying any pattern is seeing the shape price 
makes. For diamonds, they are especially difficult to identify. However, they 
occur many times at price turning points. Thus, look for diamond bottoms at 
the end of a downward price trend. 

Appearance. When prospecting for diamonds look for price to widen 
out over time, forming higher highs and lower lows. The price pattern should 
look like a broadening bottom chart pattern. Then, price narrows, forming 
lower highs and higher lows. The second half should look like a symmetri- 
cal triangle. If you draw trendlines around the minor lows and highs, the 
result should appear diamond shaped. Don’t expect perfection. More likely, 


Identification Guidelines 329 


Table 23.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price forms higher highs and lower lows in the first part of the pattern, 
then lower highs and higher lows. Trendlines surrounding the 
price action looks like a diamond. The diamond need not appear 


symmetrical. 
Price trend Price trends down into a diamond bottom. Ignore any overshoot or 
undershoot in the week or two before the diamond begins. 
Volume Downward from the start of the pattern to the end, with a surge during 
the breakout. 
Breakout Can be either up or down. 
direction 


the diamond’s top or bottom will be pushed to one side as if a gust of wind 
was playing games. 

Also, I don’t set a minimum trendline touch count. One of the trendlines 
may have only one touch (in a minor high or minor low). The other trendlines 
may have two touches, but the diamond shape should be apparent. Use the 
figures in this chapter as guidance. 

Price trend. Since we are dealing with diamond bottoms and not tops, 
the prevailing price trend is downward leading to the diamond. Ignore any 
overshoot or undershoot in the week or two before the diamond begins when 
trying to gauge the inbound price direction. 

Volume. Volume usually trends downward over the course of the pattern, 
but need not. Do not discard a chart pattern simply because volume trends 
upward instead of downward. 

Breakout day volume is usually high—meaning it is above the 1-month 
average. Again, do not discard a diamond because the breakout volume is light 
instead of heavy. 

Breakout direction. Price can break out in any direction but is upward 
most often. In Trading Tactics, I'll discuss a way to help improve determining 
the breakout direction using a single-diagonal pattern. 

Figure 23.2 shows an example of a diamond bottom. The price trend is 
downward for nearly 2 months leading to the diamond. Price moves sideways as 
the diamond reversal forms, and the range widens as higher highs and lower lows 
appear. Then the tide turns and the range narrows; lower highs follow higher lows. 
The diamond pattern takes shape after connecting the boundaries of the price 
movement with trendlines. This is a pretty-looking diamond with price crossing 
the pattern from top to bottom, filling the whitespace with price movement. 

Volume throughout the diamond is receding. This occurrence is typi- 
cal but not a prerequisite for a well-formed diamond bottom. Volume usually 
surges on the breakout. The figure shows that breakout volume is four times 
the prior day but is just slightly above average for the stock. 


330 Diamond Bottoms 


Fleetwood Enterprises (Manuf. Housing/Rec. Veh., NYSE, FLE) = 
Ty bypheot ~ 31 


rt 
|. cag 


2 -25 

Ai Throwback rae 

-—23 

' 22 
Feb 96 Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 23.2 A diamond bottom with receding volume trend. Price quickly 
recovers and reaches new highs. This is a two-diagonal diamond. 


Teradyne Inc. (Semiconductor Cap Equip., NYSE, TER) 


Myf 


Resistance li hi il i 


I i 
Mast) le | } : 


-10 
Support ~~ Support and Resistance Level _ 


! il au 


Support Level 


ral 


933 M A M J J A S ON D 94F M AM J J AS 


Figure 23.3 Support areas for diamond bottoms are near the base of the pattern. 
Shown here is support at 10 on a weekly scale. 


Figure 23.3 (weekly scale) illustrates the support area often promoted by 
diamond bottoms, in this case at $10. Although support varies from diamond 
to diamond, when it appears after a diamond bottom, it is usually near the base 
of the diamond. 

Another area of support commonly appears when the stock throws back 
to the level of the breakout. The figure shows an example of this (if you ignore 
the weekly scale and the requirement that a throwback must return to the 
breakout price within a month). 


Focus on Failures 331 


During a throwback, price climbs away from the diamond after the 
breakout, reverses course, and heads lower. Support meets the stock at the 
apex of the right half of the diamond (think of the apex of a symmetrical 
triangle), usually stopping briefly near the breakout price, then price turns 
around again and climbs. A throwback to the diamond happens about half 
the time and represents another opportunity to initiate a trade or add to an 
existing position. 

Figure 23.4 shows another example of a well-formed diamond bottom. 
Quarterly earnings were released on 9 May and the stock reacted at D by 
forming a breakaway gap on high volume. The stock formed a two-diagonal 
diamond (more about that later) at ABC with a breakout at E. Price pulled 
back to F and bottomed at G, 11% below the breakout price. Measured from 
the close the day before gap D, the stock lost 37% of its value. That was the 
reaction to just ove earnings report that the market didn’t like. 

However, the stock recovered. In fact, the continuation gap at H, oppo- 
site D, was the next quarterly earnings report. The two gaps set off the dia- 
mond as an island bottom reversal. The stock continued to recover as if the D 
earnings had never happened. ‘Traders or investors who sold as price dropped 
to G were probably kicking themselves and yelling at the company when price 
climbed to a new yearly high in November. 


Focus on Failures 
Diamonds have one type of failure that I call a 5% failure. A 5% failure hap- 


pens when price breaks out and travels no more than 5% before reversing. 
Price after the reverse may move more than 20% or close at the other side of 


Infinera Corp. (INFN) 


i 
Vinee 
al I * ; if Sago | 5 
hie at et) , ott 
hh i in ‘aa ‘ 
i : \! 4 
a 
Thy Np jie hi 
} a Wy iv = 
G 
19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 2 


Figure 23.4 A diamond bottom acts as a continuation of the downward price 
trend. This is a two-diagonal diamond. 


332 Diamond Bottoms 


Cisco Systems, Inc. (Computers & Peripherals, NASDAQ, CSCO) 


1 ‘ 

ij" Inngt My \ Descending Triangle 
1 
hn 


Overhead 
Resistance 


; I 


Throwback 


li ic Il 
i 
Hy \ 7 iv Wh J 
b, 1 il ly 
| 


i 


00 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 23.5 Overhead resistance blocks the upward breakout from this diamond 
bottom. This is a single-diagonal diamond. 


the pattern (bottom of the pattern for upward breakouts or above the pattern 
for downward breakouts). 

Figure 23.5 shows an example. Is this a valid diamond? Price trends 
downward into the pattern, the diamond shape is clear, but volume trends 
upward (higher on the right than the left). Is the rising volume trend cause 
for concern? No. Breakout day volume is also low instead of high, but who’s 
counting? Everything looks fine except for volume. If this were my trade, the 
volume anomalies would not even register. I would be more worried about 
something else. Do you know what it is? 

Look at the figure again. See that descending triangle hanging above the 
diamond like an approaching storm? Although you may not recognize the tri- 
angle pattern, you should be on the lookout for overhead resistance. That solid 
block of near-horizontal price movement starting in October—where the tri- 
angle begins—to December where it ends, would scare me off. The only way 
I would take this trade would be to short it once price turned down at the triangle. 

That is essentially what happened. Price broke out upward and the mas- 
sive overhead resistance stopped the rise. Price threw back to the diamond but 
kept going down. Let me also mention that this pattern occurred in the mid- 
dle of a bear market. So, we had a bear market sucking price lower, a falling 
price trend leading to the diamond, and massive overhead resistance. The only 
surprise would be if the price floated like pumice instead of sinking as does a 
diamond tossed into a pond. Your job as a trader is to find the gems that float. 


Statistics 333 


Table 23.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 351 126 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% C 
Average rise or decline 39% -19% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 11% -3% 
Days to ultimate high or low 182 40 
How many change trend? 56% 39% 
Statistics 


Table 23.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found diamonds starting in September 1991 through 
October 2019 in 419 stocks. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some 
no longer trade. After removing 119 bear market cubic zirconium (too few to 
report on), I was left with 477 bull market patterns. That’s not a lot of samples. 
With just 126 breaking out downward, it suggests the low sample count may 
be the reason for the good performance of this chart pattern. Hmm. Something 
to ponder. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Because price must enter 
the diamond from the top (trending down, by definition), an upward breakout 
means it’s a reversal. Downward breakouts act as continuation patterns. 

Average rise or decline. The average rise is below the 42% we see for 
most other chart pattern types, but the average decline is higher than the 15% 
loss for other chart pattern types (hence the number-one performance rank 
highlighted in the Results Snapshot at chapter start). 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. I measured the performance of the 
index from the date of the diamond’s breakout to the ultimate high or low. 
If you think that the market trend helps a pattern’s post-breakout performance, 
then the move in the index did just that. A rising tide lifts all boats in a rising 
market and you hear a giant sucking sound in a falling market. 

Days to ultimate high or low. I measured the velocity from price rising 
39% in 182 days and compared that to a 19% drop in 40 days. Result: The 
drop is 2.2 times as fast as the rise. Neat, huh? 

How many change trend? I like to see values above 50% for this item. 
Upward breakouts frequently see patterns with that kind of performance (in 
this case, 56% of diamonds with upward breakouts see price rise more than 
20% after the breakout). The 39% seeing price drop more than 20% after a 
downward breakout is quite good, too. In fact, it’s probably better than good 
(the average for other chart pattern types is 28%, so yes, diamonds do particu- 
larly well). 


334 Diamond Bottoms 


Table 23.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 46 or 13% 19 or 15% 
10 44 or 26% 28 or 37% 
15 32 or 35% 17 or 51% 
20 34 or 44% 13 or 61% 
25 25 or 52% 11 or 70% 
30 23 or 58% 8 or 76% 
35 26 or 66% 12 or 86% 
50 35 or 75% 13 or 96% 
75 34 or 85% 4 or 99% 
Over 75 52 or 100% 1 or 100% 


Table 23.3 shows how often the pattern fails. For example, 13% of dia- 
monds in bull markets with upward breakouts fail to rise more than 5%. A total 
of 26% fail to rise more than 10%. One last example for downward breakouts: 
Half (51%) fail to see price drop more than 15% after the breakout. 

Notice how quickly the failure rate increases for small changes in the 
maximum price rise or decline. Moving from a 5% max to a 10% one, fail- 
ures double. 

Table 23.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. I don’t know why, but the 74% of diamond bottoms 
breaking out upward fascinates me. Maybe I need to get out more. 

Yearly position, performance. Where are the best performers located 
in the yearly high-low price range? Diamonds that perform best break out in 
the middle of the range. My guess is that additional samples would tilt the scale 
to the lower third of the range, but that’s just a guess. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks—when price 
returns to the breakout price or diamond border within a month—occur over 
half the time. 

When a throwback or pullback occurs, it takes 12 to 13 days on average 
to complete the move back to the breakout price. Performance suffers if a 
throwback or pullback appears, too. 

To avoid a throwback or pullback, look for overhead resistance or under- 
lying support before trading. Avoid the diamond when congestion is nearby. 

After the throwback or pullback ends, price rises most often. That’s bad 
news after a pullback, though (46% continue lower, meaning price rises the 
other 54% of the time). 

Gaps. I compared the performance of diamonds with and without break- 
out day gaps. Most often, gaps help performance and that’s what we see with 
diamond bottoms, too. I used the opening price the day after a gap in the 


Statistics 335 


Table 23.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 74% up 26% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L40%, M 40%, L-19%, M-22%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H 35% H -14% 
Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 52% 67% 
Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 7% in 5 days -8% in 5 days 
Average time to throwback/pullback ends 12 days 13 days 
Average rise/decline for patterns with throw- 33% -16% 
backs/pullbacks 
Average rise/decline for patterns without 47% -26% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 66% 46% 
Performance with breakout day gap 51% -20% 
Performance without breakout day gap 37% -19% 
Average gap size $0.37 $0.53 


measure to the ultimate high or low. Thus, you can buy into the trade after the 
gap appears to participate in the better-performing move. 

Table 23.5 shows statistics related to size. 

Height. Tall diamonds perform better than short ones. To use this result, 
compute the diamond height by subtracting the lowest low in the diamond 
from the highest high and then dividing by the breakout price (the point where 
price closes outside the diamond trendline boundary). If the result is larger 
than the median listed in the table, then you have a tall pattern. 

Width. Wide diamonds perform better than narrow ones but only after 
an upward breakout. Downward breakouts show no preference. I used the 
median length as the separator between narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. For upward breakouts, tall diamonds 
outperform and wide ones also outperform. You’d think it obvious that dia- 
monds both tall and wide would perform best. However, tall and narrows ones 
actually do best for both up and down breakouts. You'll want to avoid trading 
short diamonds (either wide or narrow). They perform worst. 

Table 23.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Diamonds having a falling volume trend most often. Do 
not discard a diamond because volume trends upward. 

Rising/Falling volume. Upward breakouts with a falling volume trend 
show a two-percentage-point performance advantage compared to those 


336 Diamond Bottoms 


Table 23.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 48% -22% 
Short pattern performance 31% -16% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 10.9% 12.1% 
Narrow pattern performance 38% -19% 
Wide pattern performance 41% -19% 
Median width 34 days 37 days 
Short and narrow performance 28% -17% 
Short and wide performance 37% -15% 
Tall and wide performance 42% -21% 
Tall and narrow performance 58% -24% 
Table 23.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 70% down 67% down 
Rising volume trend performance 38% -20% 
Falling volume trend performance 40% -19% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 41% -19% 
Light breakout volume performance 38% -20% 


diamonds with a rising volume trend. Downward breakouts favor a rising 
trend for better performance, but the difference is small. 

Breakout day volume. Results are mixed with upward breakouts show- 
ing better post-breakout performance if breakout day volume is above aver- 
age and downward breakouts seeing better performance after a breakout on 
light volume. 

Table 23.7 relates to how often price reaches a stop location, but due to 
the way I calculate the location, it doesn’t apply to diamonds, so it isn’t pro- 
vided here. 

Table 23.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. Diamond performance has deteriorated since 
the 1990s, as the table shows. That’s shown in the column of upward breakouts. 
Downward breakouts don’t fare much better, though, with the last two decades 
having similar performance, but both are well below the 1990s level. 


Statistics 337 


Table 23.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 45% -23% 
2000s 39% -14% 
2010s 35% -15% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 5% 11% 
2000s 8% 19% 
2010s 26% 19% 
Table 23.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 77 or 22% 44 or 35% 
Single bust count 36 or 47% 30 or 68% 
Double bust count 23 or 30% 2 or 5% 
Triple+ bust count 18 or 23% 12 or 27% 
Performance for all busted patterns -12% 34% 
Single busted performance -19% 48% 
Non-busted performance -19% 39% 


Failures over time. This shows how many patterns fail to see price move 
more than 5% after the breakout. The sample counts are few, totaling 46 for 
upward breakouts and just 19 for downward ones. I’d ignore the results, espe- 
cially the 26% failure rate (bull market, 2010s). All three decades have samples 
counts ranging from 110 to 121 (up breakouts only), so it’s not a low-sample- 
count problem. The numbers might be correct. 

Table 23.9 show busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Diamonds bust frequently, but not as often as 
other chart pattern types. 

Busted occurrence. Sorting the busted patterns into single, double, and 
more than two busts (triple+) shows that single busted patterns happen most 
often. Which one comes in second depends on the column you’re looking 
at. It’s typical for triple+ to place second in frequency (downward breakouts 
show this). 

Busted and non-busted performance. If you’re lucky enough to trade a 
single busted pattern, you can do as well or better than non-busted diamonds. 
Of course, you have to trade it perfectly and often to match the rates shown in 
the table. Good luck with that, but the 48% gain after a downward breakout 


338 Diamond Bottoms 


makes me want to wait for a diamond with a busted downward breakout to 
come along. Maybe I can hitch a ride. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 23.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The Results Snapshot (“Percentage meeting 
price target”) at the beginning of this chapter shows how often the measure 
rule works using the full pattern’s height. 

For an example, refer to Figure 23.7. In both diamonds, compute the 
height by subtracting the lowest price in the pattern (point B) from the highest 
high (point A) then adding to (upward breakouts) or subtracting from (down- 
ward breakouts) the breakout price (point C). The breakout occurs the day 
price closes outside the diamond boundary. 

Specifically, the diamond top (left diamond) shows a height of 7.62. That 
is, 79.25 — 71.63, or the high minus the low. Since the breakout is downward, 
subtract the result from the breakout price. That gives a target of 65.88 or 
73.50 — 7.62 (the breakout price minus the height). For downward breakouts, 
ignore targets below zero. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often various heights work 
with the measure rule. For example, using half the diamond’s height means 
price will likely reach the target more than 80% of the time. That’s very good. 


Table 23.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the diamond height from the highest high to the lowest 
low and then add the result to the breakout price if the breakout is 
upward; subtract the height from the breakout price for downward 
breakouts. The result is the target price. The bottom portion of the 
table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Quick rise/fall Price often returns to the launch price following a quick rise or fall pre- 
ceding the diamond. 


Wait The diamond can break out in any direction, so wait for the breakout. 
for breakout 


Busted trade See Table 23.9 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 88% 82% 
Percentage reaching full height target 73% 55% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 50% 23% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 34% 12% 


Trading Tactics 339 


Using tall heights (2x, 3x) in the projection means the measure rule target will 
be harder to hit, but if price does reach it, the profit will be better. 

Once you have a target, you can use the diamond’s height to see if the 
target is reasonable. Let’s use the left diamond’s numbers. Divide the diamond’s 
height (7.62) by the breakout price (73.50) to get a potential 10% drop. 
Table 23.3 shows that 37% of diamond bottoms with downward breakouts in 
bull market will fail to see price drop more than 10%. Flipping that around, it 
also means that 63% of the time, the stock will reach a target 10% below the 
current price. That’s not terrific, but it’s not awful, either. 

Quick rise/fall. Figure 23.7 also shows an alternative way of determining 
the magnitude of the rise or decline. When price shoots upward leading to the 
start of the diamond (in the case of the left diamond), a quick decline often fol- 
lows, which can take price back to the launch point (often stopping just above 
it). I show this as the “Expected Decline” in the figure. 

The diamond bottom (right diamond) shows a similar situation. Price 
makes a steep drop into the pattern and soars back out in a similar trend. The 
stock stops climbing near the launch point (shown as the “Expected Rise”). 

Wait for breakout. Before you invest in a stock showing a chart pat- 
tern, wait for the breakout. Since diamonds can break out either up or down, 
you cannot predict the breakout direction with certainty. Thus, wait for the 
breakout—a close outside the pattern boundary—before taking a position. Yes, 
premature breakouts do occur, but they are rare. A premature breakout hap- 
pens when price closes outside the diamond boundary but returns in a day or 
two. In the 288 diamonds I looked at, I found fewer than a dozen with prema- 
ture breakouts. 

Busted trade. Downward breakouts that single bust show good gains. 
See Table 23.9 for more information. 

Table 23.11 shows a table for diagonal diamonds. The name comes from 
an article in Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities magazine, November 
2018, by Igor R. Toshchakov. Figure 23.6 shows a simplified drawing of his 
examples. Let’s discuss the patterns before I talk numbers. 

Look at AB, a diamond pattern he calls a single diagonal, where the top 
and bottom are connected by the longest trend in the pattern. It’s a diamond 
pattern (yes, I could have drawn it better, so pretend it’s a good-looking dia- 
mond), but the bottom (B) appears before the top (A). He says that this com- 
bination indicates the breakout will be downward. 

Pattern CD is another single-diagonal diamond except the top (C) comes 
before the bottom (D). The predicted breakout direction from this pattern 
is upward. 

The right portion of the figure shows two-diagonal diamond shapes. 
Instead of one long trend connecting the top and bottom of the pattern, we 
see two equal or nearly equal lengths connecting the top and bottom. Two 
diagonals tend to be a bit squatter looking on the side with two touches (FG 
and IJ), so there’s a bit of a difference between single- and two-diagonal shapes, 
making it easier to determine which is which. 


340 Diamond Bottoms 


Table 23.11 
Diagonal Diamonds 

Description Identification 

Single diagonal, Bottom forms before the top. The longest trend connects the top 
bottom before and bottom. Pattern looks like a diamond pushed to the right. 
top The breakout is supposed to be downward but is actually upward 

most often. 

Single diagonal, Bottom forms after the top. The longest trend in the diamond con- 

bottom after top nects the top and bottom. Pattern looks like it’s been pushed to 


the left. This configuration correctly predicts an upward breakout 
but not all of the time. 


Two diagonal Looks like a head-and-shoulders, top or bottom. Two lines of nearly 


equal length connect the top and bottom. If the bottom trendline 
touch comes after the top touch, the breakout direction is likely to 


be upward. 
Correct? Benchmark 
Single diagonal, bottom before top, down breakout 28% 26% 
Single diagonal, bottom after top, up breakout 81% 74% 
Two-diagonal, bottom before top, down breakout 26% 26% 
Two-diagonal, bottom after top, up breakout 76% 74% 
E 
A 
: 72% 74% 
Breakout Breakout 
Upward Upward 
: F G 
Single-Diagonal Diamonds Two-Diagonal Diamonds 
C I J 
P 76% 
1% Breakout 
Breakout Upward 
Upward 
D 
H 


Figure 23.6 Shown are four combinations of single- and two-diagonal configu- 
rations for diamonds. 


In the top-right panel, trends EF and EG form the two longest segments. 
Notice how the lines do not connect to the bottom of the diamond (instead, 
price touches the sides and they straddle the bottom). 


Trading Tactics 341 


The bottom-right panel shows the pattern flipped upside-down. Trends 
HI and HJ connect the top and bottom. Again, they straddle the diamond’s top 
peak where the trendlines join. Toshchakov says that with two-diagonal shapes, 
the breakout can be in either direction. 

Single diagonal. I used 246 diamond bottoms found from May 1996 to 
April 2020. I went through each pattern and marked whether it was a single- 
or two-diagonal pattern and logged when the top and bottoms of the pattern 
appeared. ‘Table 23.11 shows the results in the lower portion of the table. 

If you ignore whether the pattern is a single- or two-diagonal configu- 
ration, a downward breakout will happen 26% of the time and an upward 
breakout will happen 74% of the time. That’s the benchmark for the breakout 
direction (from Table 23.4), which is what I want to test. 

I sorted the diamonds into single- and two-diagonal shapes and sorted 
by whether the top or the bottom of the pattern came first. The configuration 
shown at AB in the figure, where it’s a single diagonal with the bottom coming 
before the top, is supposed to break out downward. I found that worked only 
28% of the time. That’s better than the benchmark’s 26%, but it’s well short 
of the 72% that break out upward. In other words, it’s more correct to say the 
pattern breaks out upward most often. 

Configuration CD shows a single diagonal with the bottom coming after 
the top. His technique says these types of diamonds break out upward. Indeed 
they do 81% of the time compared to the benchmark’s 74% of the time. That’s 
a handy improvement. 

Two-diagonal. For two-diagonal patterns, I checked whether the top 
or bottom came first and checked the breakout direction. The benchmark rate 
doesn’t change with 26% of diamonds breaking out downward and the other 
74% breaking out upward. 

For two-diagonal patterns, when the bottom (F) happened before the top 
(E in pattern EFG), I found they break out downward 26% of the time. That 
ties the benchmark, but far from the 74% that break out upward. 

The two-diagonal, bottom (H) after the top pattern (I in HIJJ pattern), 
correctly predicts an upward breakout 76% of the time. That’s slightly better 
than the 74% benchmark. Of course, Toshchakov doesn’t claim that the two- 
diagonal has a defined breakout pattern, but I checked anyway. Figures 23.1 
and 23.2 show two-diagonal patterns, and both have upward breakouts. Fig- 
ure 23.4 shows a two-diagonal diamond with a downward breakout. 

How do you apply this to your trading? When the bottom comes after the top, 
expect an upward breakout.’ Two configurations meet that test: the single diago- 
nal, top before bottom, shown as CD in Figure 23.6, and the two-diagonal 
pattern HIJ. Expect an upward breakout 76% to 81% of the time on average, 
depending on whether it’s a single- or two-diagonal pattern. 

Figure 23.5 shows a single-diagonal pattern with the bottom com- 
ing before the top. The breakout is supposed to be downward, but it’s not. 
Figure 23.7 shows two single-diagonal patterns with the top coming before the 


342 Diamond Bottoms 


bottom. The left one breaks out downward (the prediction fails), but the other 
diamond on the right shows a correct, upward breakout. 


Sample Trade 


Scott graduated from engineering college and took his first professional job at 
a growing software company. The job pays well, but he has many school loans 
and a mountain of dept. He thought of using his paycheck to keep ahead of the 
bills while depending on the bull market to furnish the luxuries. 

He had his eye on a new stereo system and wanted it for a party he was 
hosting during the Fourth of July festivities. That did not leave him much 
time, so he searched for a chart pattern he could trade profitably. He chose the 
diamond bottom shown in Figure 23.7 (the diamond on the right). Scott first 
noticed the diamond in May, a few days before the breakout. He believed that 
the price would not decline below 69.88, or 12 cents below the round number 
of 70, and at the same level as a couple of price peaks in January. 

Risking just $0.75 with a possible reward of $3.75 (the pattern’s height) 
gave him a risk-to-reward ratio of 5:1 (5 is the reward for every dollar risked). 

“Tf everything worked as planned, I would make enough to buy the stereo.” 

The day after the stock broke out upward, he bought and received a fill 
at 71.75 (near point C). “Entry was higher than I liked, but with the strength 
shown, I was sure the trade would work out. I placed a stop at 69.88 with 
my broker.” 


Dow Chemical Co. (Chemical (Basic), NYSE, DOW) 


Diamond Top Target Price 


Expected Rise 


Cc 


A 
Wisi 
I, avi ’ wi Ay \ 8 


dl 
y "| 1 B | 


Expected Decline 


B Symmetrical _ 67 


arget Price | iamon triangle - 
eure | i i | Pr bi | se ; ia 63 
en, au 


Aug 94 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 23.7. A diamond top (left) and a diamond bottom (right), both single- 
diagonal diamonds. 


Sample Trade 343 


Three days later the stock closed at 75, above the target price. He dropped 
by the music store just to fondle knobs and flip switches of his dream machine. 

Then things began going wrong. The stock closed down nearly $3 to 
72.13. It dropped to 71.38 the next day and made a lower low a day later. 
Suddenly, Scott was losing money, and his dream stereo was in danger of 
remaining on the store shelf. Should he sell the stock and put off the party for 
another time? 

Luck was on his side and price began climbing again. Soon, it reached 74, 
but the honeymoon didn’t last long. Price completed a symmetrical triangle 
but, “I didn’t see it.” 

The stock broke out downward from the triangle. The stock even gave 
him another chance to get out at a profit when it attempted a pullback to the 
triangle boundary. “I was busy making party favors, and missed that signal, too. 
Am I an idiot or what?” 

When he received a call from his broker in mid-June reporting that 
the stop took him out at 69.88, Scott scratched his head and wondered what 
went wrong. 

He asked me. “One word: Greed. Since you needed money for the stereo, 
once price cleared the top of the diamond, you should have put a limit order to 
sell at your target.” Although this technique limits the profit potential (because 
you get taken out even though the stock may double after that), it allows a 
trader to capture the turn near an expected high. 


24 


Diamond Tops 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: After an upward price trend, a diamond pattern forms. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 

Breakeven failure rate 

Average rise 

Volume trend 

Throwbacks 

Percentage meeting price target 


See also 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average drop 

Volume trend 

Pullbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


344 


Intermediate-term bullish continuation 
39 (last) out of 39 

21% 

29% 

Downward 

57% 

65% 


Diamond bottoms 


Short-term bearish reversal 
3 out of 36 

15% 

17% 

Downward 

58% 

63% 


Tour 345 


The Results Snapshot shows the important results for diamond tops. In 
appearance, the only difference between diamond top and bottom patterns is 
the price trend leading to the diamond. For diamond tops, the price trend is 
upward leading to the pattern. Diamond bottoms have price trending down- 
ward into them. 

A review of the numbers shows that upward breakouts rank last for per- 
formance. The average rise, at 29%, is well below the 42.4% gain showed by 
the average chart pattern. The failure rate is high, too, ranking 33 out of 39. 
That’s not dead last, but the patient might need a respirator. 

Diamonds with downward breakouts do well as far as the average decline 
goes. They rank third. It’s as if diamond tops are bearish patterns and an 
upward breakout suffers while a downward breakout thrives. 


Tour 


What does a diamond top look like? Figure 24.1 shows a good example. This 
diamond signals a reversal of the prevailing upward price trend and shows 
the preferred behavior of a top: Price returns to the level before the diamond 
began (the launch price). 

The reversal stands out and makes the diamond easier to find (because 
it’s at the end of a swift uptrend). Of course, not all diamond tops act this 


Baker Hughes (Oilfield Svcs./Equipment, NYSE, BHI) 


i | tH hy yy 2% 
I i lh iM \\ 
Hh i ls Athy Tle 


Ww” 


ji ! 
Feb 95 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 24.1 A good example of a diamond top. Notice that price quickly returned 
to the $20 level. 


346 — Diamond Tops 


way. Some signal a reversal of the prevailing trend and price not only retraces 
recent gains but continues moving down, too. 

I want to emphasize the return to the launch price in this figure. Notice 
the strong upward move at A. Price zips skyward on high volume. After the 
diamond top completes, the stock drops. Often the drop isn’t as fast as the rise. 
Indeed, price may move sideways for a time. In some cases, certainly not all 
and I don’t have a good number for you as an estimate of how often this occurs, 
price returns to stop just above the launch price. By that, I mean point B will 
bottom just above the price of point A. 

In this case, that doesn’t happen. Price meets A at B and the drop from the 
diamond to B doesn’t take long, either. In many cases, you may see price move 
up strongly at A, but a downward breakout won’t return price to A or even 
slightly above it. The stock just doesn’t make it back down. However, this idea 
of returning to the launch price makes for setting a price target easier. It won’t 
always work, but you have an idea of how far price might drop. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 24.1 lists identification guidelines for diamond tops. Consider the dia- 
mond top pictured in Figure 24.2. A broadening top looks like a mouth open- 
ing at G, inhaling price. The diamond appears at D, so let’s talk about it. 

Appearance. The fluctuations of peaks and valleys form the diamond 
shape when trendlines connect them such as that shown in the figure. Notice 
that the diamond is not symmetrical; irregular diamond shapes are common 
for this pattern. Even so, they do look like diamonds. 

Price trend. The short-term price trend from A to B is upward leading 
to the start of the pattern. We see a bit of overshoot at B and undershoot at C 
before the diamond builds. Ignore the overshoot and undershoot when assess- 
ing whether a diamond is a top or bottom. 

Volume. The volume trend is receding in this diamond, according to 
linear regression. All I see is a big volume spike in the middle of the pattern. 
It’s like a middle finger pointing at the diamond. Breakout day (E) volume at 
H is high but not even close to what it was in the middle of the diamond. Price 
throws back to the breakout price, F, before resuming its upward move. 

Support and resistance. Support and resistance for diamond tops com- 
monly appear at the top of the pattern, as seen in Figure 24.3. The diamond 
reversal forms a resistance level, repelling price during the rise in March and 
April 1993, and is not pierced until a year later. 

A congestion zone forms in October 1993 and lasts through March of 
the following year before price climbs convincingly above the resistance area. 
Even then, during April and May 1994, price is buoyed by the support zone at 
31 created a year and a half earlier. 


Identification Guidelines 347 


Table 24.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price forms higher highs and lower lows (widening appearance), then 
lower highs and higher lows (narrowing appearance). Trendlines con- 
necting the minor highs and lows resemble a diamond. The diamond 
need not appear symmetrical and can be tilted to one side. 


Price trend Price trends up to the diamond top. With this definition, diamond tops 
need not form at the top of a price chart—they can form anywhere. 
Ignore any overshoot or undershoot a week or two before the pat- 
tern starts. 


Volume Diminishing over the length of the formation. Breakout volume is usu- 
ally high, and it can continue high for several days. Do not discard 
a pattern because it shows an unusual volume trend or unusual 
breakout day volume. 


Support and The diamond creates a location for support or resistance. Diamond 
resistance tops usually show support/resistance near their top, which can last 
up to a year or more. 
Breakout Price can break out in any direction, but slightly favors a down- 
direction ward breakout. 


Alaska Air Group, Inc (ALK) 


“how Pach 


\ 


\/ -58 


\ | us + | | , ty, vi | f ik 763 
| ‘ ee f \ | i yi Nee 


18 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 24.2 This diamond top appeared when price was moving sideways. 


Figure 24.4 shows another example of a diamond top. I would expect 
price to break out downward because of the quick rise leading to the pattern 
(late January) and drop until they found support around the 108 level, the price 
range of the January lows. As you can see, that did not happen. Price broke out 
upward instead. 


348 = Diamond Tops 


Gillette Co. (Toiletries/Cosmetics, NYSE, G) 


eae thf | ‘hi = 


Resistance 31 
rl il! | Support _30 
-29 


92} } AS OND93F MAM] J ASOND 94FMAM JJ AS OND 


Figure 24.3 Support and resistance for the diamond appears at the top of the 
pattern. A support and resistance zone at 31 created by the diamond lasts for a 
year and a half. Note the weekly time scale. 


Atlantic Richfield Co. (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, ARC) _ 128 


A if, fh tee fe 
ae fl 


| yh 


| 
! | Il | il 
| lI i, rf | i if 


Nov 92 Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 24.4 This diamond top sees price continue higher. 


Does this diamond obey the identification guidelines? Price rises into the 
pattern from the bottom, so the upward price trend is correct for a top. The 
diamond shape becomes clear after drawing trendlines along the minor highs 
and lows. Linear regression on the volume trend shows that it tilts downward, 


Focus on Failures 349 


as expected (take my word for it). Breakout day volume is high, but again, this 
is not a rule, just an observation. A breakout on low volume is fine. 

In short, the diamond top pictured in Figure 24.4 is valid. With an upward 
breakout, I would check for overhead resistance to the upward move, but this 
figure does not show any. A look at the weekly chart would clarify the situation 
and allow a trader to estimate the likely rise (assuming price stops at overhead 
resistance). 

Breakout direction. Price breaks out in a direction that’s almost ran- 
dom, but it favors a downward direction. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 24.5 shows a diamond top failure. The diamond may look odd by its 
unsymmetrical appearance, but does it qualify as a valid diamond? Yes. The 
price trend leading to the pattern is up, there are plenty of trendline touches 
in the pattern, and volume diminishes from being high on the left to low on 
the right—all are ingredients of a properly selected diamond top. Breakout 
volume, however, is timid, falling well short of the peaks posted during the 
prior three days. 

Price breaks out downward from the diamond and reaches the ultimate 
low as shown on the chart. After that, a pullback sees price recover to the 


Cabot Oil and Gas A (Natural Gas (Diversified), NYSE, COG) 
- 21 


- 20 
Pullback i - 19 
h | | : y 
; ‘i ly | 

i / “1 

| I | ll Bes LW Wa br 
if th ' hs " i f Low nf : | Nf - 16 

A i! f ht Breakout Volume 


96 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 97 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 24.5 A valid diamond top breaks out downward, but price fails to descend 
far because of underlying support. 


350 Diamond Tops 


breakout price and keeps climbing in a swift move upward, peaking in early 
February. The price drops, gapping lower (breakaway gap). 

Is low breakout volume the reason why price failed to descend far (just 
3%)? Maybe. A high volume breakout would have given more confidence to a 
bearish situation and perhaps prevented a pullback. I have noticed that high- 
volume downward breakouts pull back less often than do low-volume ones. 
This makes intuitive sense, as a high-volume descent tends to push price down 
farther than a low-volume one. 

Perhaps the key to this failure is like many others: Support below the 
pattern stops the decline. On the weekly chart (not shown), support appears 
in February and August 1996, and May 1995, all with price peaking near 17. 
Coupled with a bullish general market, the rising tide lifted all boats and pre- 
vented this one from sinking. 

Based on this chart, if this were my trade, I would have seen the support 
in July (point A) as a warning sign. That would be my guess as to how far price 
would drop. Indeed, price does stop at that level in April, but that is well after 
the pattern fails. 

If price pierced the point A support zone at 15.50, I would expect a con- 
tinued decline to the September low. To play it safe, perhaps a target of 14.50 
(above the September tail because you do not want to place a target based on 
an outlier spike) would work. 

A stop would have closed out my short position at the prior minor high 
(near the price level where the word “Pullback” points in the figure). 

Why do chart patterns fail? Who knows? They just do. Use stops to pro- 
tect your position and use conservative price targets. 


Statistics 


Table 24.2 shows general statistics for diamond tops. 

Number found. I scoured my three databases to unearth enough dia- 
monds to make the statistics tables worthwhile. I found the first pattern in 
August 1991 and the most recent in November 2019. I found 896 diamond 
tops in 539 stocks, but not all stocks covered the entire period and some no 
longer trade. Bear market samples were too few to include in this chapter. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Because we know price 
trends upward into the pattern, an upward breakout means the pattern acts as 
a continuation. Those with downward breakouts act as reversals. 

Average rise or decline. As I mentioned previously, the meager rise falls 
well short of what we see in other chart patterns. However, downward break- 
outs do well for a bearish breakout. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The numbers suggest how well you 
could have done if you bought the stocks in the index as opposed to trading 
the diamonds perfectly. The numbers also show the influence of the general 


Statistics 351 


Table 24.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 340 393 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% C 100% R 
Average rise or decline 29% -17% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 8% -3% 
Days to ultimate high or low 153 50 
How many change trend? 48% 33% 


market on the average rise or decline. A large up move (bull market) helped 
price rise while a downward move (bear market) pulled the stock lower. 

Days to ultimate high or low. I checked my speedometer and found that 
the drop after a downward breakout from a diamond is nearly twice as fast as 
the rise (upward breakout). So if you’ve ever wondered why you lose so much 
so quickly when price drops, now you know. 

How many change trend? I consider values for upward breakouts above 
50% to be good, but diamond tops fall short of that goal. Just 48% see price 
climb more than 20% after the breakout. Downward breakouts, however, 
exceed the 28% average for most other chart pattern types by a handy amount. 

Table 24.3 shows failure rates for diamond tops under varying breakout 
directions. 

How do you make sense of the numbers? The table shows how likely it is 
that your pattern may fail to rise or drop a given amount. For example, in bull 
markets, 21% of the diamonds with upward breakouts failed to see price rise 
more than 5%. Thirty-seven percent failed to see price climb more than 10%. 
Similarly, 15% of the patterns in bull markets with a downward breakout failed 
to see price drop more than 5%. 

For small moves (up to 15%), diamonds with downward breakouts are 
the best bets. They have the lowest failure rates. This changes for moves 15% 
and higher. For large moves, patterns in bull markets with upward breakouts 
show smaller failure rates. 

Table 24.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. Downward breakouts occur most often, but the 
direction is almost random. 

Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance onto the yearly 
price range, we find price within a third of the yearly low as having the best 
performance. The other two thirds don’t show much performance difference 
between themselves. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. How often does price throw back (upward 
breakouts) or pull back (downward breakouts) to the diamond trendline bor- 
der or breakout price? Answer: about half the time. 


352 Diamond Tops 


Table 24.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 71 or 21% 59 or 15% 
10 55 or 37% 80 or 35% 
15 29 or 46% 62 or 51% 
20 23 or 52% 61 or 67% 
25 35 or 63% 42 or 77% 
30 20 or 69% 29 or 85% 
35 18 or 74% 18 or 89% 
50 32 or 83% 35 or 98% 
75 27 or 91% 7 or 100% 
Over 75 30 or 100% 0 or 100% 
Table 24.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 46% up 54% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L 35%, M 28%, L-20%, M -17%, 

12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H 29% H -17% 
Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 57% 58% 
Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 5% in 4 days -6% in 5 days 
Average time to throwback/pullback ends 10 days 13 days 
Average rise/decline for patterns with 21% -14% 

throwbacks/pullbacks 
Average rise/decline for patterns without 39% -21% 

throwbacks/pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 58% 48% 
Performance with breakout day gap 25% -15% 
Performance without breakout day gap 30% -18% 
Average gap size $0.56 $0.29 


The time to complete the throwback or pullback ranges between 10 and 
13 days. When a throwback or pullback occurs, performance suffers, as the 
table shows. Thus, the key to selecting better performing patterns is to search 
for underlying support or overhead resistance before trading. Nearby support 
or resistance may repel the downward or upward move, respectively. 

Gaps. Across the board, gaps hurt performance. By gaps, I mean a price 
gap that occurs on the day price closes outside the pattern boundary (the 


Statistics 353 


breakout day). ’m not sure why this is because gaps are supposed to help per- 
formance, not hinder it. 

Table 24.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. I consider height to be one of the best predictors of future per- 
formance. Tall diamonds perform better than short ones. To determine if the 
pattern is short or tall, measure the diamond height from the highest high to 
the lowest low in the pattern and then divide by the breakout price (where 
price pierces the diamond boundary). If the result is larger than the median 
shown in the table, then you have a tall pattern; less than the median and the 
pattern is short. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones. I used the 
median width as the separator between narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. Diamond tops both tall and wide 
either tie or outperform the other combinations. For upward breakouts, avoid 
those patterns that are short and narrow. Downward breakouts suffer when the 
pattern is short and wide. 

Table 24.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward, but the results are almost ran- 
dom. I used linear regression on volume to determine the trend, so no guessing 
was involved. 

Rising/Falling volume. There’s no consistent trend for rising and falling 
volume. Upward breakouts do better if volume is rising throughout the pat- 
tern. Downward breakouts show the reverse, with falling volume showing a 
slight post-breakout performance advantage. 


Table 24.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 33% -21% 
Short pattern performance 25% -13% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 9.8% 9.9% 
Narrow pattern performance 26% -16% 
Wide pattern performance 32% -18% 
Median width 38 days 36 days 
Short and narrow performance 24% -14% 
Short and wide performance 27% -12% 
Tall and wide performance 34% -21% 


Tall and narrow performance 30% -21% 


354 — Diamond Tops 


Table 24.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 55% down 59% down 
Rising volume trend performance 32% -16% 

Falling volume trend performance 26% -18% 

Heavy breakout volume performance 30% -17% 

Light breakout volume performance 27% -18% 


Breakout day volume. Upward breakouts do best if volume is above the 
30-day average. Downward breakouts show the reverse, with light breakout 
day volume showing price having a larger decline. 

The inability of upward and downward breakouts to agree for both rising/ 
falling and heavy/light volume suggests the findings are unreliable. As a trader, 
I don’t put much stock in volume. In fact, I prefer to look at charts without volume 
showing. I have seen that rising volume on the way to the ultimate high seems to 
help performance, but I haven’t found a way to predict that kind of a volume trend. 

Table 24.7, how often stops hit, is missing. My computer can’t correctly 
place stops for this pattern, so I don’t show the table. 

Table 24.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. Downward breakouts show good performance 
back in the 1990s, but performance has steadily declined since. Upward break- 
outs did best in the 2000s with the other two decades performing close to one 
another (within two percentage points). 

Failures over time. Downward breakouts show steadily increasing fail- 
ure rates, where the numbers represent how often a diamond top fails to see 
price move more than 5% after the breakout. 

Upward breakouts don’t show the same trend. Rather, the 2010s have the 
highest failures and the 2000s showed the fewest. 

Table 24.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. A third of diamond tops will bust. That means 
price moves no more than 10% after the breakout before it reverses and sails 
across the pattern to break out in the new direction. 

Busted occurrence. Single busts happen most often, but you'll have to 
consult the table for whether double or more than two (triple+) busts come in 
second. I like to see single busted counts higher, like 70% or more. That way, 
if I want to trade a busted pattern, I can assume it’ll single bust and give me 
the best performance. Because single busts are below 70%, Id avoid trading a 
busted pattern unless you were sure it would single bust. Why the emphasis on 
single busted patterns? 

Busted and non-busted performance. The answer is because single busted 
patterns perform best. They beat the three combinations (singe, double, and 


Trading Tactics 355 


Table 24.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 24% -20% 
2000s 37% -15% 
2010s 26% -14% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 20% 7% 
2000s 12% 18% 
2010s 28% 24% 
Table 24.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 114 or 34% 130 or 33% 
Single bust count 54 or 47% 77 or 59% 
Double bust count 48 or 42% 8 or 6% 
Triple+ bust count 12 or 11% 45 or 35% 
Performance for all busted patterns -13% 36% 
Single busted performance -22% 58% 
Non-busted performance -17% 29% 


triple+, combined) and non-busted patterns. In fact, patterns busting a downward 
breakout perform twice as well as their non-busted counterparts. Isn’t that a trip? 


Trading Tactics 


Table 24.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to predict a price target. 
Consider Figure 24.7, a chart of a diamond top. Compute the formation height 
by taking the difference between the high in the pattern (point A at 43.85 in 
this example) and the low (B at 38.08). Add the difference (5.77) to the break- 
out price (C at 41.85, the point at which price pierces the diamond boundary) 
to get the target (47.62). In this example, price didn’t reach the target. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works 
using various heights in the computation. For example, using the full height 
(like we did in the example) shows price reaching the target between 63% and 
65% of the time, depending on the breakout direction. Cut the height in half, 
use it in the formula, and the success rate increases. Double or triple the height 
and the success rate tumbles. 


356 Diamond Tops 


Table 24.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height by subtracting the lowest low from the 
highest high in the diamond. For downward breakouts, subtract the 
height from the breakout price. For upward breakouts, add the differ- 
ence to the breakout price. The result is the price target. Alternatively, 
the stock can return to the launch price from which it began. The bot- 
tom portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Wait For best results, wait for price to close outside the diamond trendline 
for breakout border before placing a trade. 
Risk/reward Look for support (risk) and resistance (reward) zones before placing a 


trade. Those zones are where the trend is likely to pause or even stop. 
From the current closing price (before the breakout), compute the dif- 
ference between the zones and the current price. The ratio of the two 
must be compelling enough to risk a trade. 


Busted patterns See Table 24.9 for help trading a busted downward breakout. 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 83% 86% 
Percentage reaching full height target 65% 63% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 40% 30% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 29% 16% 


After you compute the height, divide it by the current price and compare 
it to the results in Table 24.3. In the above example, the height is 5.77, and let’s 
assume the breakout price is the current price, 41.85, for a potential rise of 
14%. How likely is that? 

Table 24.3 says that in bull markets, almost half (46%) of patterns will fail 
to rise more than 15% (which is closest to the potential rise of 14%). That also 
means 54% will exceed a 15% rise. So the probabilities could be a lot stronger 
for this trade. 

However, there is an alternative method that sometimes yields more 
accurate results. The method involves looking at the price chart and seeing if 
there is something to reverse. By this I mean diamonds sometimes form after a 
quick run-up (or down) in price. The reversal could erase the gains and return 
price to where they were before the run-up. Figure 24.1 shows an example of 
where it worked (price at B returned to the price of A). 

Wait for breakout. When trading technical patterns like diamond tops, 
it is always safest to wait for the breakout. If you do not wait for the breakout, 
you may face a situation similar to that shown in Figure 24.4. Instead of price 
retracing the quick rise from the January low, price resumed trending higher. 
A trader shorting the stock before the breakout would likely take a loss. 

Risk/reward. Before placing a trade, consider the risk/reward ratio. In 
essence, you first identify the support and resistance levels and calculate the 


Trading Tactics 357 


difference between those levels and the current price. Trades that result in risk/ 
reward ratios of one to two or higher are worth making. With smaller ratios, 
the risk may be too high to warrant a trade. 

’ll confess that ’m holding my nose as I’m typing this (which isn’t easy, 
by the way). In my trading, I don’t care about the risk/reward ratio. Why? 
Because I let profits run, easily beating a lousy risk/reward ratio in a trade oth- 
ers might discard. 

Busted pattern. Consult Table 24.9 for guidance on trading busted 
patterns. Downward breakouts provide the best performance advantage. 
After the stock busts a downward breakout, and closes above the top of the 
diamond, buy. 

Table 24.11 shows a table for diagonal diamonds. The name comes from 
an article in Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities magazine, November 
2018, by Igor R. Toshchakov. Figure 24.6 shows a simplified drawing of his 
examples. Let’s discuss the patterns before I talk numbers. 

Look at AB, a diamond pattern he calls a single diagonal, where the top 
and bottom are connected by the longest trend in the pattern. It’s a diamond 
pattern (yes, I could have drawn it better, so pretend it’s a good-looking dia- 
mond), but the bottom (B) appears before the top (A). He says that this com- 
bination indicates the breakout will be downward. 

Pattern CD is another single-diagonal diamond except the top (C) comes 
before the bottom (D). The predicted breakout direction from this pattern 
is upward. 

The right portion of the figure shows two-diagonal diamond shapes. 
Instead of one trend connecting the top and bottom of the pattern, we see two 
equal or nearly equal lengths connecting the top and bottom. Two diagonals 
tend to be a bit squatter looking on the side with two touches (FG and JJ), so 
there’s a bit of a difference between single- and two-diagonal shapes, making it 
easier to determine which is which. 

In the top-right panel, trends EF and EG form the two longest segments. 
Notice how the lines do mot connect to the bottom of the diamond (instead, 
price touches the sides and they straddle the bottom). 

The bottom-right panel shows the pattern flipped upside-down. Trends 
HI and HJ connect the top and bottom. Again, they straddle the diamond’s top 
peak where the trendlines join. Toshchakov says that with two-diagonal shapes, 
the breakout can be in either direction. 

Single diagonal. I used 388 diamond tops found from May 1996 to April 
2020. I went through each pattern and marked whether it was a single- or 
two-diagonal pattern and logged when the top and bottoms of the pattern 
appeared. ‘Table 24.11 shows the results in the lower portion of the table. 

If you ignore whether the pattern is a single- or two-diagonal configu- 
ration, a downward breakout will happen 54% of the time and an upward 
breakout will happen 46% of the time. That’s the benchmark for the breakout 
direction (from Table 24.4), which is what I want to test. 


358 = Diamond Tops 


Table 24.11 
Diagonal Diamonds 
Description Identification 
Single diagonal, bot- | Bottom forms before the top. The longest trend connects the 
tom before top top and bottom. Pattern looks like a diamond pushed to the 


right. The breakout is supposed to be downward but is actually 
upward most often. 


Single diagonal, bot- | Bottom forms after the top. The longest trend in the diamond 
tom after top connects the top and bottom. Pattern looks like it’s been 
pushed to the left. This configuration correctly predicts an 
upward breakout but not all of the time. 


Two diagonal Looks like a head-and-shoulders, top or bottom. Two lines of 
nearly equal length connect the top and bottom. If the bottom 
trendline touch comes after the top touch, the breakout direc- 
tion is likely to be upward. 


Correct? Benchmark 
Single diagonal, bottom before top, down breakout 58% 54% 
Single diagonal, bottom after top, up breakout 65% 46% 
Two-diagonal, bottom before top, down breakout 57% 54% 
Two-diagonal, bottom after top, up breakout 52% 46% 
E 
NY 
als 74% 
Breakout Breakout 
Upward Upward 
F G 
Single-Diagonal Diamonds Two-Diagonal Diamonds 
C | J 
6 76% 
81% Breakout 
Breakout Upward 
Upward 
D 
H 


Figure 24.6 The predicted breakout direction for diagonal diamond patterns. 


I sorted the diamonds into single- and two-diagonal shapes and sorted 
by whether the top or the bottom of the pattern came first. The configuration 
shown at AB in the figure, where it’s a single diagonal with the bottom coming 


Sample Trade 359 


before the top, is supposed to break out downward. I found that worked 58% 
of the time. That’s better than the benchmark’s 54%, but it’s too close to ran- 
dom for my taste. 

Configuration CD in Figure 24.6 shows a single diagonal with the bot- 
tom coming after the top. His technique says these types of diamonds break 
out upward. Indeed they do 65% of the time compared to the benchmark’s 
46% of the time. That’s a significant improvement. 

Two-diagonal. For two-diagonal patterns, I checked whether the top or 
bottom came first and checked the breakout direction. The benchmark rate 
doesn’t change with 54% of diamonds breaking out downward and the other 
46% breaking out upward. 

For two-diagonal patterns, when the bottom (F) happened before the top 
(E in pattern EFG), I found they break out downward 57% of the time, a slight 
improvement over the 54% benchmark. 

The two-diagonal, bottom (H) after the top combination (I in HJJ pat- 
tern) correctly predicts an upward breakout 52% of the time. That’s almost 
random. Of course, Toshchakov doesn’t claim that the two-diagonal has a 
defined breakout pattern, but I checked anyway. Figure 24.4 show a good 
example of a two-diagonal pattern with the bottom coming before the top. It’s 
supposed to break out upward, which it does in this example. 

How do you apply this to your trading? Only single diagonals with the 
bottom after the top work well enough to consider using. First, you have to 
determine if the diamond is a single- or two-diagonal pattern. Once you figure 
that out, check to see if the bottom comes after the top. If so, there’s a 65% 
chance price will break out upward. 

Figure 24.6 shows a single diagonal with the bottom after the top. And 
look! It breaks out upward. Figure 24.5 shows a single diagonal with the bot- 
tom after the top and a downward breakout when it should be upward. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 24.7 shows a diamond top Lorenzo traded. He first noticed the dia- 
mond well after it formed—during the throwback to be exact. The throwback’s 
hooking pattern caught his attention, and he searched for a nearby chart pat- 
tern. In this case, he saw a diamond top, but was it a valid diamond? 

Lorenzo reviewed the identification guidelines and found that price was 
rising into the pattern, verifying a top. The diamond shape, although pushed 
to one side, had an adequate number of touches of each diamond boundary 
(the trendlines). Volume receded from the middle of the pattern to the end, so 
it had a downward trend. 

Breakout volume was high but nothing to write home about and well 
below the peaks of a few days earlier. Price also gapped upward (C), suggesting 


360 Diamond Tops 


Abbott Laboratories (Medical Supplies, NYSE, ABT) 


MW | 
h(t h \ 
| ‘| Bought 


Target 


Fm — c ; 
i esistance , F i | 
——_— \\ i i Mm 


i i 
Ps i E Sold —fiil iy 
7 / 


ly i 3 Throwback M "Wh 


Dome-shaped -31 
Volume - 30 


ATH 


02 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan03 ~~ Feb 


Figure 24.7. Shown is a diamond top with dome-shaped volume. To get a price 
target, compute the formation height (A — B) and add it to C, the breakout price. 
The result is the target price for upward breakouts. 


buying enthusiasm. However, he knew that breakout day gaps resulted in per- 
formance that was not as good as those diamonds without gaps. That made 
him nervous. 

Since the breakout was upward, he checked for overhead resistance and 
saw the long island pattern in May. Price tested the region at point D, leading 
to the throwback. Still, he knew that price would eventually pierce that resist- 
ance, perhaps after multiple attempts to break through. 

He computed the predicted price target using the diamond height pro- 
jected upward from the breakout price. “The target was at the high end of 
the resistance area,” he said. “I hoped price would reverse there.” That meant 
watching the stock closely and selling when it neared the target to maximize 
profit. On the downside, if price dropped, he would close out his position just 
below the diamond bottom (point B). 

‘Two days after price closed the gap in the throwback, “I bought at 43.” 

In the days that followed, the stock dropped. “It’s been my experience that 
many of my trades either do well right from the start or fall apart. This looked 
as if it were going to crumble, so I placed a stop-loss order at 37.93.” That was 
below the round number support at 38 and just below the diamond bottom. 

Price climbed. When they closed above the prior minor high, point D, 
he raised his stop to just below point E, a nearby minor low. Price continued 


Sample Trade 361 


higher for two more days, then retraced its gains, attempted another high 
(point F), and then started a long slide. 

“T know from experience that failure of the stock to make a higher high [at 
point F] was a bearish sign [a 2B pattern], but hoped the stock would rebound. 
It didn’t. Instead, price gapped down and tripped my stop. I took a 5% loss.” 

What did he do wrong? I would not have taken this trade because of 
nearby overhead resistance. Since there are plenty of chart patterns in other 
stocks under more promising circumstances, why take one with high risk and 
limited profit potential? On the plus side, he used a stop-loss order and raised 
it as price climbed. Eventually, the order took him out for a small loss. That 
is the way it should work when a trade goes bad. Let your profits run and cut 
your losses short. 


25 


Diving Board 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price moves horizontally for several weeks to months, forming a flat base 
followed by a sharp plunge. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish continuation 
Performance rank 1 (best) out of 3 

Breakeven failure rate 4% 

Average rise 73% 

Volume trend Upward 

‘Throwbacks N/A 

Percentage meeting price target 62% 

See also Cloudbanks, dead-cat bounce 


Late in 2019, individual stocks were struggling to climb higher in the 
rarified atmosphere of high altitude. Many moved sideways, forming a flat base 
going into 2020. 

Then Covid-19 came along and started killing hundreds of thousands of 
people and infecting millions worldwide, so far. The indices tumbled, sinking 
35%, sending them into a bear market. Individual stocks have been decimated, 
dropping up to 70% from their peaks made late last year. 

In late March 2020, the markets started to rebound on hope that the 
recovery is in sight. Poor corporate earnings usually send their stocks down 
and the larger names pull down the general market as well. But the markets 


362 


Tour 363 


shrug off the bad news (a bullish sign). Future quarters may also suffer, so 
there’s lots of risk (or potential reward) to buying now. Uncertainty is why 
the markets are so volatile, gaining or losing thousands of points in one trad- 
ing session. 

The pattern we’re seeing in individual stocks is called a diving board. It’s 
a flat base (the board) followed by a steep plunge and then a recovery. The pat- 
tern shares a shape similar to the cloudbank chart pattern, but the details are 
different. 

I discovered the diving board pattern on Thanksgiving Day, 2010, when 
I went shopping for stocks to buy. I was on the weekly scale and saw a flat 
base followed by a plunge (diving into the water) and a straight-line recov- 
ery (returning to the surface and climbing out of the water). The flat base 
reminded me of a diving board and subsequent plunge into the water, hence 
the pattern’s name. 

This pattern is one I search for frequently when the markets are soaring 
to new highs and many good stocks are overvalued (priced too high). I switch 
to the weekly charts and search for diving board patterns. They represent 
good value with the potential for long-term appreciation. But they are not low 
risk, especially if you buy near the plunge low (I'll discuss what plunge means 
later). 

The above Results Snapshot shows a high average rise and small failure 
rate. Those two are like opposite ends of a seesaw: When one goes up, the 
other goes down. Because the pattern is so tall, the percentage meeting the 
price target (62%) is not as high as I like to see. It’s a warning that making a 
profit from this pattern may not be as easy as the low failure rate suggests. 

The numbers also come from the weekly scale, so there are only two 
other chart patterns to compare against. Searching for the ultimate high on 
the weekly scale gives much higher results than doing so on the daily scale, so 
don’t compare the results of this pattern to those on the daily scale. 

Let’s take a look at this chart pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 25.1 shows an example of what a diving board pattern looks like on 
the weekly scale. The board portion of the pattern is at A (I emphasize board 
because I refer to it often in this chapter. It’s the flat movement before the 
plunge). Price moves horizontally with the bottom of the board flat or nearly 
so. The board is often weeks to months long. Following the end of the board, 
price doesn’t just drop or meander lower, it plunges. So I call the steep drop 
(to B) a plunge (that is, the drop from the board end to the subsequent low), a 
term I'll refer to in this chapter. 

The plunge is often severe, carrying price lower for several weeks to 
months. If a swing trader can determine when the stock bottoms, there’s 


364 _ Diving Board 


3M Company (MMM) 


Figure 25.1 This diving board pattern leads to a large upward move. Note: 
weekly scale. 


money to be made riding the recovery. You can think of this pattern as a small 
or shorter version of a cloudbank pattern (see the chapter on cloudbanks) and 
ride the stock back to the cloud base (the board). 

‘Trading the recovery is difficult to do. The diving board pattern doesn’t 
have the large-drop requirement that a cloudbank does (a drop of 40% or 
more), so a late entry will diminish the potential and there’s no guarantee that 
price will rise back to the board, either. I’ll describe how well this setup works 
later in the chapter (Table 25.11). In this example, price does return to the 
board and breaks out upward at C. 

The preferred method of trading diving board patterns is to wait for price 
to close above the top of the board (top of the chart pattern). Buy the stock and 
hope it continues rising. The statistics in this chapter discuss this setup. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 25.1 shows the identification guidelines. Refer to Figure 25.2 for addi- 
tional guidance. In your quest to find these patterns, imagine driving down 
the road and hitting a pothole. The road is the board, and the pothole is the 
plunge. In technical terms, find a flat base followed by a sharp sell-off. Once 
price recovers, it can soar. You want to catch price as it reaches for the sky. 

Appearance. Switch to the weekly scale when searching for diving 
board patterns because these are long-term patterns. Price moves horizon- 
tally, forming the board, often having a flat bottom, but ignore the appear- 
ance of the top. 


Characteristic 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 25.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


365 


Appearance 


Board 
Plunge 


Volume 


Breakout 
direction 


Duration 


Price moves horizontally, forming a flat base followed by a sharp 


plunge. Use the weekly scale, but this pattern will appear on the daily 


charts, too. 


This is the support region before the plunge, and it does not include 


the plunge. 


Deep plunges tend to result in better performance than smaller ones. 


However, | didn’t set a minimum depth for the plunge. 
Upward. 


Upward. A breakout occurs when price closes above the top of the 


board (above the highest price in the pattern). 


The average width of the board (not including the plunge) is over 5.5 
months long, and the duration from start of the board to the bottom 


of the plunge is 7 months. Avoid short boards. 


fan 
| 


v 
re 
fw 


fell og 
rh i yh’ 


17FMAMJJ]ASONDIBEMAMJ]JASONDI9FMAMJ J AS OND 20 


Costco Wholesale Corp (COST) 
F lp 310 
Uta = 322 
ay Tey) - 294 
|| = 286 
Ay = 278 
aly - 270 


.? = 
tr | = 262 


Figure 25.2 Note: weekly scale. The bottom of this board (A) is flat followed by 
plunge B. A broadening top appears at E. 


The figure shows the board portion of the pattern as the horizontal line 
at A. Price moves sideways for about two months and finds support on the line. 
Sometimes the bottom of the pattern isn’t flat, but the sideways path should 


be obvious. 


I like to see price touch the board often, setting up a support area. The 
length of the board is often months and in rare cases can be a year or longer. 

Board. The board portion of the pattern is the flat support region 
(A) before the plunge (B). It does not include the plunge. 


366 _— Diving Board 


Plunge. Price drops after the board ends. The plunge varies from a small 
amount (single digits) to 98% with the median plunge measuring 14% (average 
19%) for those patterns with upward breakouts. As I mentioned, the plunge is 
the drop from the end of the line at A to the bottom at B. 

Volume. Volume trends upward from the start of the board to the bot- 
tom of the plunge. Often, you'll see volume rise as price plunges, especially at 
or near the bottom. 

Breakout direction. This is always upward, by definition. An upward 
breakout occurs when price closes above the top of the chart pattern. Ignore 
the pattern if price fails to close above the top of the pattern or if price makes 
a lower plunge. 

In this example, the top of the pattern is C and an upward breakout hap- 
pens when price closes above the line at D. At E, the stock forms a broadening 
top before continuing to move higher. 

Duration. The table gives guidance for how long the diving board pat- 
tern is. I like to see a diving board patterns at least one or two months long. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 25.3 shows a chart busy with lines on the weekly scale. Let’s discuss 
each one. Line A shows lots of support with price dropping to, or coming near 
to, the line. Price plunges on the way down to B, completing a diving board 
pattern. Price makes a double bottom (with not-so-equal bottoms at B and 


Accelerate Diagnostics Inc (AXDX) 


Nh, yO Aude, he : 
\ \ Mi 7 au Ww Nw \: 


! 1 


M J S 14M J S 15M J S 16M J S 17M J S 18M J} S 19M J S 


Figure 25.3 Note: weekly scale. A number of potential diving board patterns 
appear on this chart, but none of them have upward breakouts, which is a close 
above the top of the pattern. 


Statistics 367 


B1) and recovers. The stock rises to the bottom of the board (A) and contin- 
ues higher. 

Unfortunately, price doesn’t break out upward (a close above the peak 
price in the board). So ignore this pattern. It fails to perform as expected. 

Points C, D, and F are additional diving board patterns. Price rests on 
support, touching or coming close to the horizontal support lines multiple 
times. Price plunges to E (which shares the plunge with diving boards C and 
D), and plunge G for board F. 

Boards A and C are in uptrends, and F is in a downtrend. A check of 
the numbers shows that there is a negligible performance difference (after the 
breakout) based on the trend direction from the trend start to the pattern’s 
start. In other words, boards A, C, and F should perform similarly even though 
they appear in uptrends (A, C) or a downtrend (F). 

The diving board patterns shown fail to break out upward and that 
accounts for most of the pattern failures. However, if price fails to rise very 
high (more than 5%) after the breakout, then that’s a failure, too. 


Statistics 


Table 25.2 shows general statistics. I did not tally statistics for bear markets 
because the patterns ended around the same time, toward the end of the 2007 
to 2009 bear market. You don’t get the diversity that I seek in these statistics. 

Number found. Because I’m using the weekly scale, there will likely be 
fewer patterns than if I used the daily scale. Even so, the diving board pattern 
is plentiful. I used data from May 1990 to June 2019, finding patterns in 513 
stocks. Not all stocks covered the entire range, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Most of the diving board 
patterns acted as continuations of the upward price trend, not reversals. 
Remember, I’m only looking at upward breakouts. 


Table 25.2 
General Statistics 

Description Up Breakout 
Number found 760 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 37% R, 63% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 79% R, 69% C 
Average rise 73% 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change 22% 

Days to ultimate high 455 


How many change trend? 72% 


368 _ Diving Board 


Reversal/continuation performance. Reversals outperform continua- 
tions by a handsome margin, but that may be because samples were fewer (278 
versus 482). Additional samples may narrow the performance gap. 

Average rise. Because I’m using the weekly scale, price trends longer 
than on the daily scale (because of the way I look for the ultimate high). So 
we show a huge average rise of 73%. The median (or midrange) value is more 
sedate, at 42%. That kind of a gain would still be a nice addition to your wal- 
let or purse. Unfortunately, such a large gain usually won’t happen overnight 
(except in your dreams). 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The table shows the average gain in the 
S&P 500 index from the breakout of the diving board pattern to the ultimate 
high for the pattern. The pattern outperforms the index and that’s typical for 
chart pattern performance, regardless of the pattern type. Even so, having the 
general market help carry the stock is a nice addition. 

Days to ultimate high. The time to reach the ultimate high is about 15 
months. Keep in mind that the average rise is 73%, so price climbing that far 
will take longer than smaller rises. Nevertheless, this is a chart pattern best 
suited for long-term investing and not swing trading. 

Table 25.11 discusses statistics to trade the recovery from the plunge low, 
something that may interest shorter-term traders. 

How many change trend? Almost three-quarters of the patterns (72%) 
will see price rise more than 20% after the breakout. That’s a huge percentage. 
Again, it probably has more to do with the weekly scale and how it affects the 
rise from the breakout to the ultimate high. 

Table 25.3 shows cumulative failure rates for the diving board pattern. 
I measure failure by how often price fails to reach a target. For example, I found 
that 34 or 4% of diving board patterns failed to rise more than 5% after the 


Table 25.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise (%) Up Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 34 or 4% 
10 68 or 13% 
15 61 or 21% 
20 48 or 28% 
25 43 or 33% 
30 42 or 39% 
35 30 or 43% 
50 108 or 57% 
75 92 or 69% 


Over 75 234 or 100% 


Statistics 369 


breakout. An additional 68 patterns, for a total of 102 (68 + 34) or 13% of the 
total, failed to see price rise more than 10%. 

Notice that 234 patterns (bottom of the table) show price rising over 
100%. Out of 760 samples, the 234 represent 31% of the patterns. The results 
suggest there’s a decent chance of having a whopper of a gain lurking out there. 

Table 25.4. I decided to erase the table of breakout statistics because it 
contained only two rows. The first row said that all breakouts are upward from 
a board. A breakout occurs when price closes above the highest peak in the 
board portion of the pattern. 

The second entry discussed how performance was distributed across the 
yearly high-low range. Samples were too few in two of the ranges, leaving the 
bulk of the patterns approaching the 73% average rise shown in Table 25.2. 

Table 25.5 quantifies performance by size. 

Height. I measured the height of the pattern from the top of it to the 
bottom of the plunge and sorted patterns by the height as a percentage of the 
breakout price. Tall patterns outperform short ones, and that’s typical for chart 
patterns of all types. Indeed, height is a superior indicator of performance. 
However, just because your diving board pattern is tall does not guarantee that 
it will see price rise more than the average. Similarly, a short diving board pat- 
tern may show performance that blows the doors off your Pinto. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than short ones. Width measures 
from the start of the board to the bottom of the plunge (not to the end of 
the board). The median width, which determines narrow or wide, is almost 
7 months long. 

Height and width combinations. Because tall patterns outperform and 
wide patterns outperform, you’d expect the combination of tall and wide to 


Table 25.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Up Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 79% 
Short pattern performance 68% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 26.9% 
Narrow pattern performance 67% 
Wide pattern performance 80% 
Median width 204 days 
Short and narrow performance 69% 
Short and wide performance 65% 
Tall and wide performance 86% 


Tall and narrow performance 61% 


370 _— Diving Board 


show the best performance. Indeed, that’s what the table shows. However, the 
worst performance doesn’t come from short and narrow patterns as you might 
expect, but from tall and narrow ones. 

Table 25.6 shows volume-related statistics. However, because the pattern 
is so long and it’s on the weekly scale, I don’t think volume matters (because 
it'll be irregular looking). It might be more important to check fundamental 
factors to see what’s moving the stock. 

Volume trend. Volume trends upward most often probably because of 
an increase of share turnover as price drops to the plunge low. 

Rising/Falling volume. A rising or falling volume trend (from pattern 
start to plunge low) does not affect performance. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume pushes price higher than 
does light volume, but I’m not sure this is meaningful. Few people are search- 
ing for diving board patterns anyway, but when price breaks above a prior peak 
(the breakout), I’d expect volume to increase when the bulls go on a buying 
spree and push price higher. 

Table 25.7 shows how often price will drop and touch a stop-loss order 
placed at various locations on the board, not including the plunge. I measured 
the drop from the week after the breakout to the ultimate high and compared 
it to the various points in the board (from the highest peak to the lowest low 
before the plunge occurred). 

Price will drop to the top of the pattern 74% of the time and less often 
to the middle and bottom of the board. ’'m surprised that the 74% number 
isn’t higher, but it’s like buyers are saying, “We want price to go higher. Now!” 


Table 25.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Up Breakout 
Volume trend 66% up 
Rising volume trend performance 73% 
Falling volume trend performance 73% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 75% 
Light breakout volume performance 70% 

Table 25.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Up Breakout 
Board high 74% 
Board middle 23% 


Board low (plunge not included) 7% 


Trading Tactics 371 


If you wish to use this number, then placing a stop at the top of the pat- 
tern will trigger 74% of the time, on average, if your trade behaves like the 
average. Placing it in the middle of the board will cut the stop-loss triggers 
substantially, to 23%. Obviously, you’ll want to determine how big a loss you'll 
incur if the stop triggers and adjust the stop placement accordingly. 

For long-term holds, for which this pattern is best suited, you may wish 
to not place a stop and just monitor performance periodically. Remember, it 
takes 2 years for price to reach the ultimate high, on average. If you use a stop, 
you'll likely be taken out of the trade before it reaches its maximum price. 

Table 25.8 shows how the diving board pattern has performed over 
the decades. 

Performance over time. The 1990s had the fewest samples (167) and the 
2010s had the most (395), so maybe the descending performance reflects the 
sample count. That is, as more samples become available, performance drops. 

Failures over time. Failures show a similar trend. The bigger the gain, 
the lower the failure rate. 

Table 25.9 is supposed to show performance for busted patterns, but I 
didn’t analyze them for this pattern. Thus, you won’t find Table 25.9 in the book. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 25.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The sample trade will give an example of how to 
use the measure rule. I found that if you use the full height of the pattern from 
the top of it to the low at the plunge and add the height to the top of the pat- 
tern, price will reach the target 62% of the time. That’s if your pattern behaves 
like the ones I found. 

For a closer or farther target, adjust the height in the calculation accord- 
ingly. The bottom of the table shows how often the measure rule works for 


Table 25.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout 
1990s 101% 
2000s 76% 
2010s 60% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 2% 
2000s 3% 


2010s 6% 


372 Diving Board 


Table 25.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the height of the pattern from the top of the board to the 
plunge low. Add the height to the high price in the board. The result 
is the target price. The bottom half of the table shows how often 
this works. 


Stop location Place a stop at the location of your choice, using the results in Table 25.7 
as guidance. You may wish to avoid using a stop to remain in the 
trade longer. 


Ride the bounce Buy the stock after the plunge completes with the expectation that price 
will recover to the board. This is high risk. 

Lower plunge __ Avoid diving board patterns that make a second, lower plunge. Fig- 
ure 25.5 shows an example at B1. 


Buy breakout Place a buy stop when price closes above the peak price in the board 
portion of the pattern. Be prepared to hold for years to achieve the 
highest price but monitor the trade. 


Description Up Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 79% 
Percentage reaching full height target 62% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 41% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 29% 


varying heights used in the calculation. For example, if you cut the height in 
half, the stock will reach the target 79% of the time on average. 

Once you know the height, you can divide it by the breakout price and 
check it with Table 25.3, failure rates. In the Sample Trade, we’ll find that the 
height of a diving board pattern is 16.49 with a breakout price of 80.53 or 
20.5%. Table 25.3 says that 28% of the patterns will fail to see price rise more 
than 20% (the closest to 20.5%). So you have a 72% chance of having a win- 
ning trade. That’s quite good, but it depends on how you trade, of course. 

Stop location. Table 25.7 discusses stop placement, so make sure you 
check that table to understand the likelihood of being stopped out. Also, con- 
vert the potential loss into a percentage of the buy price. If the percentage is 
high, then you may wish to adjust the stop placement so you won’t lose too 
much. However, with long-term trades like this one, you may wish to zot place 
a stop. Just monitor the stock periodically and sell if the stock shows weakness 
or if the fundamentals/technicals deteriorate enough to indicate a sale would 
be prudent. 

Ride the bounce. You can trade a diving board pattern like you do a 
cloudbank pattern. The bottom of the board (the part before the plunge) would 
be the target. Make your entry after the plunge ends, if you can tell when that 


Bounce Trading 373 


occurs (good luck with that!). The difference between those two points will be 
your profit. If it’s high enough to risk a trade, buy the stock and hold until price 
returns to the board. 

Lower plunge. If the stock makes a second drop, one that takes price 
down to or below the first plunge, avoid trading the pattern. It has a higher 
likelihood of failing. The Sample Trade shows an example of this at point B1 
in Figure 25.5. 

Buy breakout. To enter the trade in a timely manner, find the highest 
peak in the board portion of the diving board pattern. Set a buy stop a penny 
above this price and wait for the order to hit. Expect to hold the stock for 
months to a year or two to achieve the full potential of the diving board pat- 
tern. If the stock doesn’t go up, then don’t buy it (that’s a joke). 


Bounce Trading 


Table 25.11 shows statistics that may help you decide if a bounce trade is 
worthwhile. The table applies only to bull markets. 

How many diving board patterns don’t see price rise to the board, that is, 
they breakout downward, not upward? Answer: 29% (not shown in the table). 
If you try to buy after the plunge ends and hope to see price return to the bot- 
tom of the board, you'll be wrong 29% of the time, on average, if your trade 
follows the patterns I found. That means you should be able to make money 
71% of the time using this setup. You'll want to place a stop below the bottom 
of the plunge and consider adjusting it as price rises. 

Plunge depth versus performance. I measured from the lowest price in 
the board to the plunge low for all patterns in bull markets, sorted by break- 
out direction. The table shows the median (midrange) plunge (14%, 19%). If 
price rises from the plunge low to break above the top of the pattern (upward 
breakouts), the depth of the plunge didn’t matter much (gains of 75% versus 
72%). However, downward breakouts tell a different story. Plunges shallower 


Table 25.11 
Bounce Trading 
Description Up Breakouts Down Breakouts 
Performance after shallow plunges 72% 22% 
Performance after deep plunges 75% 62% 
Median plunge 14% 19% 
Performance from short boards 66% 30% 
Performance from long boards 81% 55% 


Median board width 169 days 176 days 


374 Diving Board 


than the median 19% see price retrace 22% on average before heading lower 
and breaking out downward. Deeper plunges see price rise an average of 62% 
before heading back down. 

What does this mean for trading? If you’re trying to catch the bounce, 
the larger the drop from the board, the larger the bounce. I found this same 
behavior in an event pattern called the dead-cat bounce. 

Board length versus performance. The median length of the board 
doesn’t vary much depending on the breakout direction. However, long diving 
board patterns (from pattern start to plunge start) seems related to perfor- 
mance. Long patterns outperform short ones substantially as the table shows, 
for both breakout directions. Please note the difference between board length 
in this table and the width in Table 25.5. Table 25.5 includes the plunge, but 
Table 25.11 does not. 


Experience 


Let me share one diving board trade with you. It’s a cautionary tale that things 
might not work out as you expect or hope. I show the setup in Figure 25.4 on 
the weekly scale. 

Williams Companies Inc. (WMB) started building a diving board in the 
summer of 2016 (A), and it continued through November 2017. 

I’m scratching my head looking for the plunge. I think it’s at C. The 
drop below the board low represents a decline of 3%. That’s well short of the 
median plunge shown in Table 25.11 (14%). 


Williams Companies Inc. (WMB) 


Lime at r a 
) ny hi af h wil pt = 


16M J |} A SOND1I7 FMAM J J ASOND1I8FMAM] J ASONDI9FMAM]J AS OND20FMAMJ ~® 


Figure 25.4 Note: weekly scale. A diving board trade resulted in a small profit. 


Experience 375 


Apparently that didn’t bother me because I made no mention of it in my 
notes. I was focused more on the flat base as a launching pad and a zone of 
future support in case the trade went bad. 

Let’s go through the pattern. The board is at A, a flat base with price 
touching the bottom of the range several times over the months. The top of 
the board is at B. A close above B means an upward breakout. C is the plunge. 
A close below C would mean a downward breakout. 

On 19 December 2017, I bought and show the approximate date (weekly 
scale) at D. Notice that I didn’t wait for an upward breakout. 

Here are my notes to the trade. I bought less than a full position (about 
75% of full size), with the position size automatically determined by market 
and stock volatility. My computer calculated a volatility stop of 28.77 for a 
potential 4.6% loss, but this was a long-term holding, so I didn’t use a stop. 

Upside target was 47. That was the first sign of significant resistance set 
up by two valleys in 2015. 

The stock and market trends were up over 1 and 2 months but mixed at 
6 months (stock was down but market was up). The industry was mixed over 
those three measurement periods, too, with about half of the stocks trend- 
ing higher and half not. I like to see my trades have all three, stock, market, 
and industry trending upward. Finally, the stock’s relative strength against the 
Standard & Poor’s 500 index was rising, meaning the stock was outperforming 
the general market. 

“Buy reason: Diving board has completed and price is moving up. Has a 
4.04% yield at 30.14, which is very good. So this is like a utility but with upside 
potential if the diving board plays out. S&P says buy, as of 14 November 2017 
when stock was at 27.83. Says dividend was cut 69% in 2016. Wow. Insiders: 
Mixed buying and selling. Small buying 1k, 5k, 15k, 17k in May-June. Selling 
of 10k and 81k in May. Other selling in Aug, Sept, Nov, biggest was 272k in 
Sept. Small buys in Aug (5k) and Nov (6k, 6k). 

“Just saw now, after I bought, that they have 141% debt as percentage of 
equity, or $21B in long-term debt. Current ratio is 0.97. Wow. Payout ratio is 
193%. Jeepers. I bought this without doing enough investigating, I think. This 
sucker is HIGH risk. S&P says it’s undervalued (fourth with five being most 
undervalued). Says percentage of long-term debt to capitalization is 60%, but 
that’s looking forward a year, I think. Statistics show the same benchmark in 
2016 as 60%, up from 58.5% in 2015. Apparently they don’t view debt as a 
pressing problem.” 

The stock broke out upward at F. However, at E, I changed my mind 
about the stock. Here’s what I wrote for the sale. “Date sold: 18 January 2018. 
Sell reason: Weakness. Industry is mostly headed lower. This is a high debt, 
high risk co. They had permission to build a pipeline denied a week ago, and 
the stock has dropped on the news. I think it’s time to get out, near the top. 
Based on the bid/ask spread, this looks to open lower, below 32. Yuck. Filled at 
32.24, slightly lower than yesterday’s close.” 


376 Diving Board 


The stock made a slightly higher high at G and then started down. Covid- 
19 pulled the rug out of the stock at H, where it bottomed at 8.41, or 74% 
below my sale price. 

My spreadsheet of the trade says I made 7% but didn’t collect any divi- 
dends along the way. I was late entering and late exiting. I’m not so sure I agree 
with that assessment. The optimum buy location should be a penny above the 
breakout price, and I bought in well before that, but also well above the bottom 
of the board. Perhaps I was thinking that the bottom of the board was the opti- 
mum entry price. If that’s the case, then yes, I was late getting into the trade. 

As to the exit, I sold (daily chart, not shown), right at the valley of the dou- 
ble top. Sigh. If [had sold it either 3 days earlier or 3 days later, I’'d have a perfect 
exit. And yet, selling when I did locked in a small profit and avoided a huge loss. 

Here are my lessons from the trade. 


¢ Lesson: Do better homework. Finding out the company was loaded 
with debt after I bought was a mistake. 

¢ Lesson: “Stocks that cut their dividend rates outperform a year later.” 
I learned this when researching dividends in my book, Fundamental 
Analysis and Position Trading: Evolution of a Trader (Wiley, 2013). Own- 
ing a stock that cuts the dividend is painful, but the year-ahead perfor- 
mance can be rewarding. 


Lesson: Use a buy stop a penny above the top of the pattern as the 
entry price. Had I followed this, ’'d have made less, but it’s the proper 
way to trade a diving board. 

Lesson: When fundamentals change, sell. That’s what I did when 
I learned the company lost permission to build the pipeline. Selling 
locked in a small profit instead of a whopper of a loss. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 25.5 shows a trade Rich made in a diving board pattern, so let’s dissect 
it, beginning by crunching the numbers. 

The board begins the week of 7 May 2018 (A) and ends on 17 September 
2018 (Al), for a length of 134 days. Table 25.11 says that it’s a short board. 
Note that the length of the board does not include the plunge (A1 to B), oth- 
erwise the width is 176 days (narrow for Table 25.5) as measured from A to B. 
Both tables suggest underperformance. 

The height of the diving board pattern for Table 25.10 is the difference 
between the high price in the board (80.53, shown as the horizontal line end- 
ing at C) and the plunge low (B), which is at 64.04, for a height of 16.49. If 
we assume an upward breakout, the height to breakout price ratio would be 
16.49/80.53 or 20.5%. That’s short according to Table 25.5, and it also sug- 
gests underperformance. 


Sample Trade 377 


Arrow Electronics (ARW) 


m 


Figure 25.5 Note: weekly scale. Rich made a trade using a diving board pattern. 


Let’s talk about the measure rule. The height of the pattern from the 
top of the board to the plunge low is 16.49 as I already mentioned. Adding 
the height to the top of the pattern gives a target of 80.53 + 16.49 or 97.02. 
Table 25.10 says there’s a 62% chance of making it to the target using the full 
height (which we did). Using half the height would improve the chances to 
79% (from ‘Table 25.10) of reaching 88.78. 

For bounce trading (Table 25.11), the plunge measures from the bottom 
of the board (73.62) to the plunge low as a percentage of the board low, or 
(73.62 — 64.04)/73.62 or 13%. The plunge is shallow and that suggests underper- 
formance. We already calculated the board length and found it to be short, too. 

The statistics suggest this pattern will underperform. Regardless of the 
probabilities, anything is possible, so Rich decided to trade the pattern anyway. 

“T searched and searched and searched but couldn’t find any reason for 
the plunge from A1 to B. Because earnings were due to be announced the week 
of candle B, I thought that maybe the smart money was selling ahead of the 
earnings announcement.” 

He wasn’t lucky enough to catch the candle B rise. Indeed, he was look- 
ing for a longer-term hold to capture some of the mouthwatering results this 
chapter describes. He understood that the results are based on trading hun- 
dreds of diving board patterns perfectly, but grabbing a share of a 73% average 
rise was too tempting to ignore. 

“The week before I bought, the company announced annual earnings 
[not to be confused with the quarterly earnings at B] which the market liked 
[price continued higher, for a time]. I placed a buy stop a penny above the top 
of the pattern and it filled at 80.54 [at C].” 

Because predicted performance of the pattern was dismal (as described 
above), he decided to use half the height as a measure rule target, or 88.78. 


378 Diving Board 


Looking at the chart, the drop two months after B (shown as B1) didn’t 
concern him because he hadn’t bought the stock yet. However, the stock did 
form a confirmed double bottom, which was gratifying, but he didn’t like how 
volatile the stock was. The quick drops were unnerving. 

After buying at C, the stock retraced and moved higher to D, peaking 
at 86.62, just short of the 88.78 target. He hoped the stock would continue 
higher, but he also knew the next earnings report was due on 2 May 2019 
(a week after the stock peaked). 

“When the company announced earnings, the stock gapped open lower, 
so I sold this bad boy at 80.13.” On the trade, he took a loss of 41 cents a 
share and was glad he sold. The stock dropped to E, bottoming at 62.35 for a 
potential giveback from the high (D) of 28%. Instead of making 73%, he took 
a small loss. 

Notice that this diving board pattern formed a lower plunge at B1. Rich 
took the trade anyway and paid the price. 


26 


Double Bottoms, 
Adam & Adam 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Twin bottom pattern with narrow V-shaped or spike bottoms. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market 
Reversal or continuation | Long-term bullish reversal 
Performance rank 26 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 16% 
Average rise 39.4% 
Volume trend Downward 
Throwbacks 67% 
Percentage meeting 73% 
price target 
See also Double bottoms, Adam & Eve; Double bottoms, Eve 


& Adam; Double bottoms, Eve & Eve 


This is the first of four chapters on double bottoms. Each chapter repre- 
sents a different bottom shape (a variation described by Adam and Eve desig- 
nations). An Adam & Adam double bottom reminds me of a person on stilts: 
narrow legs, V-shaped, perhaps made of single spikes that touch the ground 
near the same price. 


379 


380 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


The Results Snapshot shows the important numbers. Adam & Adam dou- 
ble bottoms have slightly above-average breakeven failure rates and mediocre 
average rises. That places the performance rank in the bottom half of the list 
of chart patterns. Throwbacks occur in two out of three trades, so you may be 
able to add to your position or initiate a new one during a throwback. 

Let’s take a tour to see what the pattern looks like. 


Tour 


Figure 26.1 shows the first example of an Adam & Adam double bottom. Since 
we are looking at bottoms, the pattern forms at the end of a downward price 
trend and it acts as a reversal of that downtrend. The pattern can also appear 
in the corrective phase of a measured move up (price trends upward, forms the 
double bottom during a retrace, and then continues trending upward). 

Notice the twin spikes (bottoms) that happen so often in this pattern. 
They drop well below the surrounding price lows yet bottom near the same 
price level. If the bottoms are not single spikes, then they take on the shape of 
a narrow V. Eve bottoms, by contrast, are wide and rounded looking. 

Price recovers between the two bottoms. The rise need not look rounded— 
many times it appears irregular. Volume is higher on the left bottom than on the 
right, as in this example. Thus, the volume trend recedes across the pattern. 


Engelhard Corporation (Chemical (Specialty), NYSE, EC) 


C 27 
yf y lh ir : 
\ | h f hid i ny! 

My | / | ! i os 
| | | _M Confirmation Line - 
Wl EN - 21 
) iy Throwback 7 


| 


Adam Adam 


- 17 
02 Oct Nov Dec Jan 03 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 26.1 An Adam & Adam double bottom with twin spikes, volume heavier 
on the left bottom than the right, and U-shaped volume. 


Identification Guidelines 381 


The confirmation line marks the highest high in the pattern. A twin bot- 
tom pattern is not a valid double bottom until price closes above the confir- 
mation line. That occurrence signals a breakout and time to take a position in 
the stock. But before you do, check the identification guidelines to be sure you 
have a good pattern. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 26.1 shows guidelines for identifying Adam & Adam double bottoms. 

Appearance. The shape of each bottom should appear similar. That 
means both bottoms should look narrow, V-shaped, perhaps with a long, 
downward price spike or tail. To gauge the width, look at the top of the bottom. 
I know that sounds confusing, but the top end of the valley will tend to remain 
narrower than Eve bottoms along their height. (Eve bottoms, by contrast, will 
appear more rounded and wider than will their Adam counterparts). 

When judging bottom shape, ask yourself if the two bottoms look the 
same or different. If they look the same, then you have either Adam & Adam 
or Eve & Eve bottoms. Narrow bottoms signify the Adam variety and wide 
bottoms signify the Eve variety. 

Price trend. Look for price trending downward into the start of the 
chart pattern. Thus, the double bottom acts as a reversal of the downward 


Table 26.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance The two bottoms in this pattern should look similar, both narrow 


and V-shaped, perhaps one-day price spikes. Both should bot- 
tom near the same price. 

Price trend Price trends downward leading to the double bottom and 
should not drift below the left bottom. 

Rise between bottoms Some set a minimum rise of 10% from the lowest valley to the 
highest peak between the two bottoms, but be flexible. Taller 
patterns perform better. 


Bottom low price Bottom-to-bottom price variation is small. The median varia- 
tion is 1%. 
Bottom separation Bottoms should be at least a few weeks apart, but | set no mini- 


mum or maximum duration for the pattern. 


Volume Usually higher on the left bottom than the right, so volume 
trends downward most often. Do not discard a chart pattern 
because volume has an unusual trend. 


Breakout direction, Upward, by definition. A breakout occurs when price closes 
confirmation above the highest peak between the two bottoms. A breakout 
confirms the pattern as valid. 


382 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


price trend. How long should the inbound trend be? As measured from the 
trend start (see Glossary “Trend start” for definition), intermediate to long- 
term trends perform best. That’s a trend longer than 3 months. 

Rise between bottoms. In the past, traders used to look for a rise 
between the two bottoms of more than 10%, as measured from the lowest 
bottom low to the highest high between the two bottoms. That’s an arbitrary 
value. I don’t pay much attention to a minimum height except to say that taller 
patterns perform better than short ones. 

For example, consider Figure 26.2, which shows a valid Adam & Adam 
double bottom (center pattern) and a potential one (upper left at ABC). The 
center Adam & Adam pattern has two narrow, V-shaped bottoms and volume 
that is higher on the left side than on the right. 

Twin bottom AB (upper left of chart) does not have Adam-shaped bot- 
toms. The bottom at B is wider and more rounded looking than what we expect 
to see in an Adam & Adam pattern. So this potential double bottom is an Adam 
& Eve pattern or perhaps an Eve & Eve. 

The rise to C is just 4%. That’s fine but well below the 10% (or higher) 
I like to see. 

Bottom low price. From the lowest low on the left bottom to the low on 
the right, the price variation should be small. For example, do not try to assign 
double bottom status to the right bottom of the Adam & Adam in October and 
point D in Figure 26.2. Point D does not drop close enough to the right bot- 
tom to qualify it as a valid bottom. 


Coherent (Percision Instrument, NASDAQ, COHR) 
- 28 
| Ih - 27 
iy, hy ee hin - 26 
hy Ih want | 
A B ll | 
lt A pin 
| | iT if ‘th 1 li - 21 
my Mm Aye we i “20 


Confirmation Line - 19 


i. . 


Throwback -17 


Hy ly 34 
lly gh PM Fy ty — 2. 
H TT, r : = 

2 


"hy ol, 


Adam Adam 


96 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 97 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 26.2 An Adam & Adam double bottom with a throwback. Pattern AB 
(upper left) is a small double bottom, but not Adam & Adam. 


Identification Guidelines 383 


The median variation between bottoms was just 1%. 

Bottom separation. How far apart should the bottoms be? Some texts 
say that bottoms must be at least a month apart, but I set no such limit. The 
median in my database was 16 days wide (from bottom to bottom). 

Volume. The left bottom usually shows higher volume than the right 
one. However, volume higher on the right side should not exclude the pattern 
from consideration. Figures 26.1 and 26.2 show volume higher on the left bot- 
tom than on the right one. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. The breakout from a double bottom 
is always upward. If price does not close above the highest peak between the 
two bottoms, then you don’t have a double bottom. 

A twin bottom pattern is not a valid double bottom until price closes 
above the high between the two bottoms. Always wait for confirmation before 
taking a position in a stock because price continues down 48% of the time. 

Figure 26.3 shows two examples of Adam & Adam double bottoms. Are 
they valid double bottoms or just twin valley patterns? In both cases, the price 
trend leading to the patterns is downward, as required (so they are bottoms and 
not tops). 

The bottoms are pointed with one-day spikes. All bottoms are V shaped, 
not wide, rounded turns. The rise to the confirmation line (that is, the pattern’s 
height) is 24% for the August bottom and 17% for the October pattern. 


Ann Taylor (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, ANN) 


i | ay \ \ | 
yo Ay 


Le ke 
| / (Mj 
| | NV Ki Ky | H 


ith 
Mn nm F \ { i 


Adam - 23 


- 14 
99 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan0O Feb 


Figure 26.3. Shown are two Adam & Adam double bottoms. The horizontal lines 
are the confirmation lines. A close above the line means the pattern is a true Adam 
& Adam double bottom. 


384 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


The price at each bottom is close enough to each other that they look 
like bottoms, not steps. The time between the twin bottoms is 3 weeks for the 
August example and 2 weeks for the October bottom. Price rises to the con- 
firmation point (shown as a horizontal line) in a snappy manner, closing above 
the highest high in just a few days (but this isn’t a prerequisite). 

The volume pattern is unexciting, including the breakout volume. In 
both examples, volume is higher on the left bottom than on the right, so the 
volume trend is downward. That’s typical. Breakout volume is slightly above 
the 30-day average, classifying the breakout as having heavy volume. Thus, 
both patterns shown in Figure 26.3 are valid double bottoms. However, price 
rises just 18% and 16% after the breakout. How can we tell the outperformers 
from the also-rans? 


Focus on Failures 
Figure 26.4 shows the first double bottom failure and it is typical. The Adam 
& Adam pattern has valleys that form after a short-term downward price trend 


and bottom near the same price. The valleys are 29 days apart, with a 17% 
rise between them. The pattern’s squiggles confirm when price rises above the 


Devon Energy Corp. ane Gas (Diversified), AMEX, DVN) 


‘ 


WV wy fina 
; i | \ 7 
ry al | ' i 


5H — contrat Line 


\ Naas 
| i i 
I wh | ) 


1 ll Porotroto to to ototobte tt teteied 
wn 
Ne} 


- 50 


00 Nov Dec Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 26.4 An Adam & Adam double bottom confirmed when price closed 
above the confirmation line, but price soon stalled. Overhead resistance (not 
shown) may have played a part, but other stocks in the industry were showing 
topping patterns. 


Focus on Failures 385 


confirmation line. That’s when it stages a breakout and the squiggles become a 
valid Adam & Adam double bottom. 

Price climbs just 2% after the breakout. Why? The first clue is that the 
pattern is in a bear market, which is never good for bullish chart patterns. 

The second clue is that there’s not much of a downtrend to reverse. The 
downward price trend starts at the March peak (the highest on the chart), so 
it is not far above the confirmation line. In other words, the double bottom 
did not act as a reversal of the longer-term prevailing price trend, but as a 
consolidation. 

If you extended the figure to the left, you would see a long line of peaks 
stretching to May 2000. That line represented a massive zone of overhead 
resistance that the double bottom could not penetrate. A check of other stocks 
in the diversified natural gas industry showed that most of them were peak- 
ing in May or June. They all started tumbling at the same time. They showed 
topping patterns that predominated (double tops and triple tops), signaling a 
downward price trend. Thus, a smart investor would have not taken this trade. 

Figure 26.5 shows an example of a second type of failure that perhaps 
you have seen. Here’s how Ted traded it. 

‘Ted is a novice investor with an attitude. He looks at the stock chart, 
checks the identification guidelines, and believes that the stock is making a 
double bottom. When price rises after the second bottom, Ted decides to pull 
the trigger early and buys the stock, receiving a fill at 42.63. He reasons that 
all the indications suggest the stock has completed a valid double bottom, so 
why not buy now? 


Air Products and Chemicals Inc. (Chemical (Diversified), NYSE, APD) 


-49 
iF : -48 
hy | -47 
MI | My bi I, Nh Confirmation Level ~46 
Wl | , | I _45 
! | i lit i | mM | Hh a 
fh | hah 1h A, _ 
iH, |i" | -42 
Adam Stock i | | 
Bought IN \ | | 
Adam Here ly i _40 
Stock Sold Here 
After One-Day -39 


Reversal 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 26.5 Example of second type of failure—failing to wait for breakout con- 
firmation. Ted decided to get an early start on the double bottom but lost money. 


386 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


‘Ted makes a good point. He is pleased with the stock’s performance until 
it begins to round over. Does he sell out now at a small profit, or should he 
hold on and risk a downturn while waiting for additional gains? This is a recur- 
ring dilemma for traders. 

He decides to hang onto his position. During May, the stock surges 
upward again before beginning a downhill run. Ted watches in horror as his 
profit vanishes and losses mount. Eventually, when price spikes downward, he 
sells at the opening the next day and closes out his position. 

What did he do wrong? He failed to wait for confirmation. Price must 
close above the confirmation point (above the peak between the two bottoms) 
before a trade is placed. Otherwise your chances of success are diminished 
(48% fail to confirm, actually). 


Statistics 


Table 26.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,295 patterns in 662 stocks starting from the 
first one in August 1991 and the most recent one in February 2020, but not all 
stocks covered the entire period and some no longer trade. Bear market sam- 
ples were removed from the tally because they were too few to include here. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. The Adam & Adam pat- 
tern is a bottom and not a top. Thus, price enters the pattern going down 
and breaks out upward, so it acts as a reversal of the downward price trend by 
definition. 

Average rise. The average rise is shown in the table. It’s below the 42.4% 
average for all chart patterns. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The S&P 500 index climbed and helped 
push individual stocks higher. I measured the rise in the index from the date 
of the double bottom’s breakout to the ultimate high. Even with the general 
market helping push the stocks higher, the chart pattern still underperformed 
other chart patterns. 


Table 26.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Number found 1,154 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 
Average rise 39.4% 
Standard & Poor's 500 change 12% 
Days to ultimate high 208 


How many change trend? 52% 


Statistics 387 


Days to ultimate high. The pattern takes 7 months to reach the ultimate 
high, on average. Every trade is different, but it suggests traders need to be 
patient as price rises over the long term. However, the median is just 73 days 
(the difference is because some patterns just trend up and up and don’t reach 
the ultimate high for years). Whether it takes 2 months or 7, ride the stock as 
long as you can before it bucks you off. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how many patterns see 
price rise more than 20% after the breakout. I like to see values over 50%, 
and double bottoms qualify. Even so, the average for chart patterns is 55%, so 
Adam & Adam patterns are a bit shy of the mark. 

Table 26.3 shows that double bottoms have a 5% failure rate that is 
above the average (meaning worse) of other chart pattern types. I show a list 
of failure rates in the table. For example, 16% of the patterns in bull markets 
fail to see price rise more than 5% after the breakout. Almost a third (31%) 
rise less than 10%. Notice how the failures get worse as you scan down the 
rows. However, the increase from row to row isn’t as steep as we’ve seen in 
other chart patterns (except for the move from 5% to 10% where failures 
almost double). 

Another use of Table 26.3 is to check on the measure rule prediction 
discussed in the Trading Tactics section later. Suppose the rule predicts a move 
from 10 to 13. That is a 30% rise. How many patterns will see price rise more 
than that? Answer: 38% (62%, on average, will fail to make it that far). Thus, it 
appears that a 30% target is too far away, but you could get lucky. 

Table 26.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is upward when price 
closes above the highest peak between the two bottoms. All double bottoms 
have upward breakouts; otherwise they are not valid patterns. 


Table 26.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market 
5 (breakeven) 189 or 16% 
10 163 or 31% 
15 107 or 40% 
20 97 or 48% 
25 85 or 56% 
30 69 or 62% 
35 61 or 67% 
50 112 or 77% 
75 110 or 86% 


Over 75 161 or 100% 


388 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


Table 26.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the 12-month low (L), L 45%, M 41%, 

middle (M), or high (H) H 32% 
Throwbacks occurrence 67% 
Average time to throwback peaks 6% in 7 days 
Average time to throwback ends 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 38% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 42% 
Percentage price resumes trend 72% 
Performance with breakout day gap 40% 
Performance without breakout day gap 39% 
Average gap size $0.55 


Yearly position, performance. I sorted the double bottom’s breakout 
price into where it occurred in the yearly price range. The best performing 
patterns have breakouts within a third of the yearly low. Avoid trading those 
near the yearly high. That suggests a bottom-fishing strategy (buy low, sell 
high) would work well with double bottoms and not a momentum play (buy 
high, sell higher). 

Throwbacks. A throwback occurs in two of every three trades. That is 
a high return rate. Thus, if you missed investing in a double bottom, you may 
have another opportunity if it throws back. 

The average round-trip return time to complete a throwback is 12 days, 
which is typical for chart patterns. Notice that when a double bottom throws 
back, performance suffers. To avoid a throwback, look for nearby overhead 
resistance. The good news is if price does throw back, it resumes the upward 
trend 72% of the time. 

Gaps. Breakout day gaps help performance but not by a huge amount. 

Table 26.5 shows statistics related to size. 

Height. Do tall patterns perform better than short ones? Yes. To use 
this finding, measure the height from the highest peak to the lowest bot- 
tom in the pattern and then divide by the price of the highest peak. Com- 
pare the result with the median shown in the table. A value higher than the 
median means you have a tall pattern. Lower than the median and you have 
a short one. 


Statistics 389 


Trade only tall patterns for the best performance. For the Adam & Adam 
pattern, the performance difference between short and tall is especially wide, 
so height is something you'll want to pay attention to. 

Width. Wide patterns outperform narrow ones by a substantial amount, 
so select wide patterns. I used the median length as the separator between nar- 
row and wide. 

Height and width combinations. We’ve seen that tall patterns do espe- 
cially well and wide patterns do well, too. Does the combination tall and wide 
also outperform? No! Tall and narrow shows a minor performance improve- 
ment over tall and wide. The numbers suggest you avoid short patterns, either 
narrow or wide. 

Table 26.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward in almost two of three cases. 
Does performance change depending on the up or down volume trend? 


Table 26.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Tall pattern performance 49% 
Short pattern performance 30% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 9.4% 
Narrow pattern performance 35% 
Wide pattern performance 44% 
Median width 16 days 
Short and narrow performance 30% 
Short and wide performance 29% 
Tall and wide performance 49% 
Tall and narrow performance 50% 
Table 26.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Volume trend 64% down 
Rising volume trend performance 39% 
Falling volume trend performance 39% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 37% 


Light breakout volume performance 42% 


390 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


Rising/Falling volume. Answer: No. I didn’t see any performance differ- 
ence between the two trends. 

Breakout day volume. Often heavy breakout day volume suggests bet- 
ter performance, but not for this chart pattern. The performance difference 
between heavy and light volume is high enough that maybe you should pay 
attention to trading breakouts that have below the 30-day average volume. 

Table 26.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the pat- 
tern in half on the price scale and checked how often price reached three areas 
on the way to the ultimate high. 

If you placed a stop-loss order at the top of the pattern, price would stop 
you out 76% of the time. Move the stop to the bottom of the pattern, and the 
stop will hit just 3% of the time. Unfortunately, you'll take a bigger loss than 
if the stop is at the pattern’s top. Regardless of where you place your stop, 
compute the potential loss as a percentage of the current price to see if you can 
tolerate or afford such a loss. 

Table 26.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The roaring 2000s showed huge average gains 
(60%). The numbers do not include the two bear markets during the decade. 
The worst performance comes from the 2010s. That decade has almost half 
the performance rate seen in the 2000s (334% versus 60%). 

Failures over time. Failures have been rising, almost doubling each dec- 
ade. That’s a scary thought, so maybe this is a statistic you shouldn’t share with 
your children. 


Table 26.7 
How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market 
Pattern top 76% 
Middle 22% 
Pattern bottom 3% 

Table 26.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 47% 
2000s 60% 
2010s 34% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 6% 
2000s 10% 


2010s 20% 


Trading Tactics 391 


Table 26.9 
Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market 
Busted patterns count 329 or 29% 
Single bust count 180 or 55% 
Double bust count 97 or 29% 
Triple+ bust count 52 or 16% 
Performance for all busted patterns -17% 
Single busted performance -27% 
Non-busted performance (Adam & Adam double top) -15% 


Table 26.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Over a quarter of patterns bust. That means 
price rises 10% or less before reversing and closing below the bottom of the 
chart pattern. 

Busted occurrence. I counted how often a pattern busts (once, twice, 
or more than twice) and show the numbers in the table. Most are single 
busted patterns. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used the performance of Adam 
& Adam double tops as a proxy for a non-busted Adam & Adam double bottom. 
The busted performance, either for single busted patterns or the combination 
of single, double, and triple+, is better than non-busted patterns. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 26.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to compute a target price. 
The rule gives you a suggestion—an idea—of how far price might rise after 
the breakout. It’s not a guarantee, and we’ll talk about numbers in the moment. 

To find the target, subtract the lowest low in whichever bottom is lower 
from the highest high between the two bottoms. Add the difference to the 
highest high. The result is the target price. 

For example, look at Figure 26.6. The highest high is at 20 (the breakout 
price or confirmation line), and the right bottom is lower at 15.50. Add the 
difference, 4.50, to the highest high to get the target, or 24.50. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches the tar- 
get. In this example, we used the full height of the pattern in the measure rule. 
That method works 73% of the time on average. Cut the height in half and 
you get a closer target but less potential profit. Double the height in the com- 
putation and the success rate drops to 53%, but you could earn more. 


392 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


Table 26.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the height from the highest high between the two bottoms 
to the lower of the two bottoms, then add the height to the high- 
est high between the two bottoms. The result is the target price. 
The bottom portion of this table shows how often the measure 
rule works. 


Wait for breakout Always wait for confirmation (a close above the highest high). 


Trade with To improve your odds of success, trade this bullish pattern in bull 
market trend markets and a bullish industry. 

Check others in Check others in the industry. If they are bullish, then the double bot- 
the industry tom has a better chance of working well. 

Stop location See Table 26.7 for stop location guidance. 

Busted trade If you can afford the risk, a busted double bottom is a bearish signal. 

Description Bull Market 

Percentage reaching half height target 88% 

Percentage reaching full height target 73% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 53% 

Percentage reaching 3x height 40% 


Once you have a target, visit the discussion of Table 26.3 to evaluate 
your chances of success. 

Wait for breakout. Since double bottoms act as reversals of the prevailing 
price trend, there is a 48% chance (I measured this in a 2018 study on the best 
entry) that price will continue declining instead of confirming the double bottom. 
That is why you should wait for a breakout (a close above the confirmation line, 
which is the price of the highest high between the two bottoms). Buying before the 
breakout is an easy way to lose money, but if you’re right, you could make more. 

In my trading, I place a buy stop a penny above the top of the chart pat- 
tern to enter a trade. That means I’m not waiting for a close above the pattern 
(and entering the next day at the open), but statistical results show the failure 
rate drops and the median rise increases (slightly) with this method. 

Trade with market trend. You'll make the most money if you trade in 
line with the market and industry trends. If the general market is bullish, then 
go long. If it’s bearish, then don’t add a long position until the bear market is 
nearing its end (like 1.5 years after it started). 

Check others in the industry. What are other stocks in the same 
industry doing? If they are showing signs of bottoming, then the double 
bottom becomes more important. If other stocks are continuing down, 
avoid trading the double bottom. Chances are the stock will fail to perform 
as expected. 


Experience 393 


Table 26.11 
Special Features 

Trading Tactic Performance 
Small bottom-to-bottom variation 31% 

Large variation 49% 

Median bottom-to-bottom variation 1% 

Lower left bottom 39% 

Lower right bottom 41% 


Stop location. Use Table 26.7 to assess the probability of a stop being 
hit. Swing traders will want to use a stop on most trades, but buy-and-hold 
investors will want to avoid them. 

Busted trade. Table 26.9 shows that busted double bottoms work better 
than non-busted double tops. A busted double bottom provides an easy entry 
signal for a short sale. 

Table 26.11 shows special features of double bottoms. 

Bottom to bottom variation. I measured the bottom-to-bottom price 
variation and found that it was smaller than I expected: 1%. I sorted perfor- 
mance of Adam & Adam double bottoms by whether price showed a smaller or 
larger variation. The table shows when the bottom-to-bottom price difference 
had a variation greater than the median, performance improved significantly. 
I don’t know why this might be. I can understand if the right bottom is above 
the left, then that would indicate buying enthusiasm. The problem is, it doesn’t 
work. Why? The number item explains. 

Lower bottom. I checked performance depending on which bottom was 
lower. There’s not a big performance difference as the table shows, but since 
you have a choice in the double bottoms you pick to trade, look for ones with 
a bottom on the right lower than the one on the left. 


Experience 


Let me share some of my experience with the Adam twins to see what lessons 
I can pass on. 


KB Home Corp. 


KB Home Corp (KBH) in 2010 made an Adam & Adam double bottom 
which confirmed. On 2 August, I bought. Upside target was 16 and then 
20 (versus a buy price of 11.65), so the target was far away. Stop location 
was 9.91, which was closer than the volatility stop of 9.68 and below round 


394 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


number 10 (support area). From my notebook: “Weekly scale (industry, too): 
weak with many stocks making bottoms. The housing industry seems poised 
to make a turn upward here. Bad news: The stock’s relative strength against 
the S&P 500 is FALLING. Buy reason: Confirmed double bottom with a 
straight-line run down. I expect this to V bottom and make a beeline run 
back up. But if the market tanks, then sell below support at 9.91. Do NOT 
ride it down.” 

I didn’t use a buy stop a penny above confirmation (optimum entry). 
Instead, I bought after the throwback completed and the stock started moving 
back up (second-best entry option). 

Over the next week, the stock went down for 3 days and then recovered. 
After that, it just went down. 

“Sell reason: The stock has broken through support at the double bot- 
tom low, and it’s going down. Time to sell. This could be a broadening bot- 
tom forming, but my guess is the stock will not bounce off the lower TL 
[trendline; it sliced through it but recovered], which is what I hoped would 
happen today. The market has been down 3 days in a row, and I expect it 
to bounce back, but things seem to be getting worse this morning. I’m just 
going to sell this turkey. Filled at 9.5701. A hard stop just above 10 would 
have improved results, but 10 is a round number. I can never make money 
trading these housing stocks. . .Existing home sales were much weaker than 
expected, but the stock opened lower, dipped, and then climbed to close 
higher. Sigh. Today (25 August), new home sales will be announced, and they 
are expected to be weak. Maybe that will take the stock down.” 

I sold the day the stock bottomed. It moved up in a choppy manner until 
reaching the ultimate high at 16.11 (short of the 20 target) in January 2011. 
This double bottom double busted, taking 17% from me. That’s double what 
I like to see. 


¢ Lesson: A buy stop placed a penny above the top of the chart pattern 
would have lowered the entry price. 

¢ Lesson: Keep losses small. A hard stop (one placed with the broker) 
a penny or two below the lower of the two lows would have limited 
losses. 


Charles Schwab Corp. 


A trade in Charles Schwab Corp. (SCHW) didn’t work out, either. 
“21 November 2002. I bought at market, filled at 11.72. This is an AADB 
trade [Adam & Adam double bottom] with a +1 score. Merrill upgraded the 
stock, and it broke out, paused at overhead resistance at 11.50. I expect a 
climb to 12-13 where it’ll meet resistance and pause [it paused at 12 and 
again at 12.50 in a second peak]. With effort, it’ll push through this and move 


Experience 395 


higher as the bull market comes back. Downside is a drop to 9, the bottom of 
a support range (9-10). [Head-and-shoulders top] neckline is at 8.50, so that 
may also add support. Median rise is 12.49, and I hope it'll beat that. I now 
expect a retest of the breakout, but we’ll have to see. Other brokerage stocks 
are struggling.” 

The double bottom formed a head-and-shoulders top as a new pattern 
between the two bottoms. The neckline of that pattern was at 8.50. 

After I bought, the stock made a symmetrical triangle with an upward 
breakout. That looked promising, but the stock reversed and headed lower. 
Here’s the sale: “21 January 2003. I sold today because the stock has dropped 
through triangle apex support on a poor earnings announcement. Filled at 
10.90 for a loss of 7%. Reason for sale: The symmetrical triangle didn’t per- 
form as expected, so it was time to get out.” 

Again, I was late buying into the stock, which cost me. The stock con- 
tinued down to 6.25, a drop of 43% below where I sold. Fortunately, I sold 
promptly and kept the loss reasonable, at 7%. 


¢ Lesson: Beware of earnings announcements. This one chopped the 
stock price almost in half. Even people who buy-and-hold should pay 
attention to earnings and earnings warnings. Often selling immedi- 
ately is the correct choice. 


Southwest Airlines 


In late February 2002, Southwest Airlines (LUV) stock peaked at 22 and slid 
all the way down to 10.90 where it formed the first bottom of an Adam & 
Adam double bottom. The second bottom appeared about a month later, in 
mid-August. Two days after it bottomed, before confirmation, I was in there 
buying, trying to pull back on the stick to keep the airline from hitting ground. 
“16 August 2002. I bought at market open, filled at 12.45. I think this has bot- 
tomed even though UAL [United Airlines] might go bankrupt. It appears that 
this might be an Adam & Adam double bottom, providing prices climb above 
confirmation. That might be tough in the short term as the market is nervous 
and airlines are the pits. I’ll buy more if this descends to 11 or so, maybe in Nov, 
then pray for a rise into the spring as airlines usually take off over that time.” 

Much to my surprise, the stock climbed and confirmed the double bot- 
tom. Yippee! 

The stock threw back to the breakout price, as one might expect (they 
happen 67% of the time), except this one kept going down. And down. It bot- 
tomed at 11.23, or 27% below the high price (15.30) reached just before the 
throwback. 

After the stock bottomed, it looked like a triple bottom, which saw the 
stock recover and confirm, too. 


396 Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam 


The stock bounced up and down around the triple bottom’s confirmation 
price. On 14 November 2002, I wrote, “I’m going to sell my shares at market 
open. CCI [commodity channel index] shows negative divergence and that’s 
the key issue. Other airline stocks are bumping against overhead resistance, 
so I expect a decline. Although it’s November, a good holding period, I think 
a short-term decline from a budding AADT [Adam & Adam double top] is in 
order. We could drop to 13, maybe 12. Then buy it back. For now, take the 
money and run.” 

I sold at 15 and made 20% on the trade, including a small dividend. If I 
had stayed in the trade for 2 more weeks, I could have sold at the ultimate high 
of 16.70. After that, the stock tumbled by 30%. 


¢ Lesson: Wait for the breakout; otherwise you risk losing 48% of the 
time. In this case, buying early worked well. 

¢ Lesson: If it was a swing trade (it wasn’t supposed to be), having a 
defined exit price of 15 would have cashed me out in about a week 
(when the stock peaked at 15.30). 

¢ Lesson: I no longer use indicators. This took me out of the trade too 
soon, but at least I didn’t ride the stock back down. 


Sample Trade 


Randy traded the stock shown in Figure 26.6 and made a tidy sum of money. 
Let me tell you how he did it. First he qualified the pattern as a true dou- 
ble bottom by reviewing the identification characteristics listed in Table 26.1. 
Briefly, the stock started down in early January after a long-term uptrend that 
began in February 1995 (not shown). 

The twin bottoms were narrow with one-day downward spikes. The rise 
between bottoms measured 29%; the bottom lows were 1% apart in price and 
separated by 64 days. Oddly, the right bottom showed higher volume, making 
for an upward volume trend. 

“T placed an order to buy the stock at the confirmation price, and it 
filled at 20.” 

The stock struggled by moving sideways for a week, then achieved liftoff. 
Price climbed until early June when it started retracing. The retrace turned 
into a throwback when price pierced the confirmation line at 20. “I expected 
a throwback, but nobody expects the Spanish inquisition. That’s from 
Monty Python.” 

Price moved up again and retraced, forming the handle of a cup-with- 
handle pattern. “I got cute. I drew a down-sloping trendline along the 
handle, and the day after price closed above the trendline, I bought more 
at 22.73." 


Sample Trade 397 


Noble Corporation (Oilfield Svcs/Equipment, NYSE, NE) 


i! A 


i er 
ie rn \! Ae WAL 


ih | Bought Hy Trend Line  - 23 
i | Confirmation Line 


Handle - 19 


\y 


, | lug i 


Adam Adam -15 


| 247 


hy hy 


96 Dec Jan 97 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep re 

Figure 26.6 Randy traded this Adam & Adam double bottom, buying at the 
confirmation price, buying again when price closed above the cup-with-handle 
trendline, and selling when price closed below the long, up-sloping sell trendline. 


He computed the target price for the double bottom (24.50, see the 
“Measure rule” in Table 26.10) and smiled when price passed that, moving up. 
Then, he drew an up-sloping trendline following the contours of the handle 
(called the “Sell Trendline” in Figure 26.6). 

“T vowed to sell the day after price closed below the trendline, which it 
did in late November [not shown], at 32.” That was down considerably from 
the high at 38.19, but he made 60% on his first trade and 41% on the cup- 
with-handle trade. 


27 


Double Bottoms, 
Adam & Eve 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Twin valley pattern with one narrow and one wide-looking bottom. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish reversal 
Performance rank 17 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 12% 
Average rise 42.9% 
Volume trend Downward 
‘Throwbacks 67% 
Percentage meeting price target 69% 
See also Double bottoms, Adam & Adam; Double 


bottoms, Eve & Adam; Double 
bottoms, Eve & Eve 


The Adam & Eve chart pattern is a variation of the double bottom. The 
Adam bottom looks narrow and V-shaped, perhaps with a large downward 
price spike. The Eve bottom is wide, rounded-looking, and sometimes has 
many short spikes like weeds sprouting in a lawn. The two bottoms should 
look different from one another. 


398 


Tour 399 


Performance is similar across three of four combinations of Adam and 
Eve double bottoms with the exception, Eve & Eve showing superior perfor- 
mance. However, I treat each variation as a separate pattern just to be sure. 
The Results Snapshot shows the important performance numbers. 

The average rise in bull markets is slightly above the average for all chart 
patterns (42.4%), placing the pattern’s rank at 17 out of 39 where 1 is best. 
Throwbacks occur two-thirds of the time, but when they happen, perfor- 
mance suffers. 

Let me give you a tour of this chart pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 27.1 shows an example of an Adam & Eve double bottom. It’s not a 
good example, but it'll do. The Adam bottom seems to be an outlier in an oth- 
erwise straight-line run down to the Eve bottom. And Eve, on this aspect ratio 
(of width to height), looks V-shaped, too. On my computer screen, both look 
better than shown here. However, my reading glasses may need adjustment. 
That, of course, brings up the first problem: How do you tell an Adam 
bottom from Eve? I programmed my computer to find them. It can differ- 
entiate between Adam and Eve consistently, not subjectively. I started to put 
the algorithm in the Glossary but gave up. It’s too complicated to describe in 


Cognex (Precision Instruments, NASDAQ, CGNX) 


28 

ri tf ae 26 
1 "hy il! nt i"! = 
hat pr 


I - 21 


il {fy \ i, 


wer 1% 


7 
98 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99 Feb Mar 


Figure 27.1 A tall one-day downward price spike is the Adam bottom, and the 
rounded turn marks the Eve bottom. 


400 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


words, and few readers will care anyway. Oftentimes you can look at a pattern 
and determine the Adam or Eve combination. 

When I look at this figure, my eye goes to the vertical line above the 
Adam label. The line points to the gap. But that line is the price bar which cre- 
ated the area gap when price opened lower. 

I checked two data sources to be sure I had good data for that price bar. 
The results are correct. The Adam & Eve double bottom appears after a long 
downward price trend in this example. The Adam bottom is narrow, a one-day 
price spike (in this example), but the Eve bottom is wider and composed of 
several short price spikes. Not only is this Adam bottom unusually long, but 
the price bottoms are uneven. More often, the price variation between the two 
bottoms is slight, which segues into the next section: Identification Guidelines. 


Identification Guidelines 


How do you identify an Adam & Eve double bottom? First, let us look at a few 
examples to get a better feel for what’s involved. Figure 27.2 shows a double 
bottom midway up a price trend that began in March 2003. I show this as an 
example of the double bottom acting as the corrective phase of a measured 
move up chart pattern. The double bottom allows price to regroup before 
renewing the attack on a new high. 


Chiron (Drug, NASDAQ, CHIR) 7 
wi, inl 56 
N i i i i fyi a 
i oe ee 


i ae 


I 
ae zi 
ny i My : 
ih vil! h Adam Eve a aq 
iy ,! - 39 


Mul 


03 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 27.2 This Adam & Eve double bottom appears as the corrective phase of 
a measured move up chart pattern. 


Identification Guidelines 401 


The Adam bottom is a one-day downward price spike. The Eve bottom 
also has a spike, but it is shorter, and the nearby wide price congestion differ- 
entiates the Eve bottom from the narrower Adam bottom. The two bottoms 
look different: skinny and fat. 

Figure 27.3 shows a better example of an Adam & Eve double bottom 
except this one is part of a longer-term downward price trend. Price reverses 
after the pattern ends by moving up for a few months before easing back down. 
Again, the Adam bottom appears narrow, V-shaped, and the Eve bottom is 
wide and more rounded-looking. Eve typically has several short price spikes 
and Adam has few (usually one or two). 

Table 27.1 lists identification guidelines, so huddle up. Let’s discuss them. 

Appearance. The two bottoms should appear different from each other. 
The left bottom, Adam, should be narrow, pointed, and V shaped, perhaps as 
a one-day downward price spike. The right bottom, Eve, should be wider and 
rounder, not V shaped. 

Price trend. Since we are dealing with bottoms and not tops, look for the 
pattern to appear at the end of a downward price trend. The trend need not be 
very long as Figure 27.2 shows (with the June peak), but the classic situation 
is like that shown in Figure 27.3. Price declines for several weeks or months 
leading to the pattern. 


Claires Stores (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, CLE) 
I 
- 16 
i 
My ill Ih 
/ |' mf 


Ly, Ry 
wl N ‘ hy - 13 


ty a 7 
yi ‘i { inl 


7 ie 
I 
| hy ay | _ 
| 
Mh ‘| ! 1 Ma 
VAN, 
Adam Eve = 
- 6 
NY 
99 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan0O Feb Mar 3 


Figure 27.3. This double bottom happens after a downward price trend. The 
pattern acts as a reversal. 


402 


Characteristic 


Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


Table 27.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


Appearance 


Price trend 
Rise between bottoms 
Bottom low price 
Bottom separation 
Price rise after 

right bottom 


Volume 


Breakout direction, 
confirmation 


Narrow, V-shaped, perhaps pointed-looking left bottom (Adam), 
sometimes composed of a long, one- or two-day price spike. 
The right (Eve) bottom appears rounded and wider. 

Price trends downward into the left bottom and should not 
drift below it. 

No minimum set, but tall patterns perform better than short 
ones. The median height is 12%, but be flexible. 

Bottom-to-bottom price variation is small. The median varia- 
tion is 1%. 

Bottoms should be several days apart, preferably several weeks 
apart. The median width is 25 days. 

Price must close above the confirmation point without forming a 
third bottom. 

Usually higher on the left bottom than the right. 

The breakout is upward when price closes above the highest 
peak between the two bottoms, confirming the pattern as a 


valid one. If it doesn’t breakout upward, you don’t have a valid 
double bottom. 


Rise between bottoms. I removed the minimum price rise between bot- 
toms of 10% because I prefer to let the double bottom pattern tell me how tall 
they should be. However, taller patterns perform better than do short ones, so 
keep that in mind as you search for a valid double bottom. The median height 
in the samples I looked at is just over 12%, probably because of the 10% mini- 
mum standard in patterns I used years ago. 

Bottom low price. The two valleys should bottom near the same price. 
Figure 27.1 pushes the limit because the bottoms differ by 8%. Figure 27.3 is 
a better example as the bottoms are closer together. 

Bottom separation. How far apart in time should the bottoms be? The 
median width is 25 days, measured from bottom to bottom. Wide patterns 
tend to outperform. 

Price rise after right bottom. The rise from the right bottom to the 
confirmation price may be brief, but it usually takes a median of just under 2 
weeks (13 days). If price makes a third bottom before confirmation, then you 
don’t have a valid double bottom. 

Volume. Most Adam & Eve double bottoms will show volume heavier 
on the left bottom than on the right. Do not exclude a pattern if it has volume 
higher on the right bottom. 

Breakout direction. The breakout is always upward in a valid double 
bottom pattern. A breakout occurs when price closes above the highest peak 
between the two bottoms. It confirms the double bottom as a valid chart 


Identification Guidelines 403 


pattern. Only then should you consider buying the stock. I use the closing 
price in my statistics because it helps prevent premature breakouts. 

Why do double bottoms form? To answer that question, consider 
the double bottom shown in Figure 27.4. After reaching a multiyear low 
in June, price recovered some of its losses by rising, leaving behind an 
Adam bottom. 

A retrace of the downward move is common, with a retest of the low 
typically following. A retest is just like it sounds: Price returns to the low set 
earlier, and it tests to see if the stock can find support at that price level. If it 
cannot, price continues moving lower. Otherwise, the low becomes the end of 
the decline and the stock begins to recover. 

Such was the case depicted in the figure. It’s clear from the volume pat- 
tern that many investors believed the low, shown as point B, was a retest of 
point A. Volume surged on two occasions in the vain hope that the decline had 
ended. Investors were wrong. 

Price held at 21 for a week before continuing down. As price headed 
toward the level of the June low (the Adam bottom), volume surged again. This 
surge marked the end of the downward plunge. Price hesitated at that level for 
slightly less than 2 weeks before turning around and heading up. 

A double bottom is nothing more than a retest of the low. Investors 
buy the stock in the hope that the decline has finally ended. Sometimes they 
are right and sometimes they are not, which leads us into the next section: 
failures. 


Central and South West (Electric Utility (Central), NYSE, CSR) 


i Breakout 


| Confirmation Line ae ii -24 
| ‘ ie \ , “23 


| Throwback 
oy Ayr " 2 
“ MW "i 
7 Hy /' i =21 
| MW 
Adam Eve -20 
-19 
May 94 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar = Apr ae 


Figure 27.4 Price confirms the breakout once it closes above the confirmation 
point, shown here as the horizontal line. Price often throws back to this level after 
the breakout. 


404 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


Focus on Failures 


It is obvious that the pattern pictured in Figure 27.5 is a valid double bot- 
tom. The first bottom occurs after a downward price trend, as you would 
expect. The two bottoms are far enough apart, the rise between them is suf- 
ficient to delineate two minor lows (valleys), and the price variation between 
the two bottoms is small. The volume pattern is unusual in that the second 
bottom has a higher, denser volume pattern than the first. However, this is 
not significant. 

After the second bottom, price rises at a steady rate until the confirmation 
point. Then price jumps up and pierces the price of the prior minor high at 
about 40.63. When price closes above the confirmation line, it signals a break- 
out and swears the double bottom formation is a valid pattern. 

In this case, as is common for many double bottoms, price throws back 
to the breakout price. However, this stock continues moving down. Scrolling 
Figure 27.5 to the left, you would see price making a new low in September 
1993 at 31.63 (not shown), below the February low of 34. 

Had you purchased this stock on the breakout and held on, you would 
have lost money. I call this type of failure a 5% failure. Price does not rise by 
more than 5% above the breakout price before heading lower. Five percent 
failures happen more often than I like to see (anything above zero is too high), 
but the failure rate for Adam & Eve patterns ranks 14 out of 39, where a value 
of 1 is best (fewest failures). That’s not too bad. 

Let’s talk numbers to see how the average pattern performs in bull markets. 


Flightsafety Intl. Inc (Aerospace/Defense, NYSE, FSI) 


Tht 
fins ‘| Breakout foal 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 27.5 Example of a 5% failure. This type of failure occurs when price 
plummets after rising less than 5%. 


Statistics 405 


Statistics 


Table 27.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,163 double bottoms in 680 stocks with the 
first one appearing in July 1991 and the most recent in February 2020. As many 
patterns as that sounds, there were not enough appearing in bear markets, so I 
removed them from the presentation. Not all stocks covered the entire range, 
and some have the audacity to no longer trade. Perhaps they’re shy. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, a double 
bottom acts as a reversal of the downward price trend when price breaks out 
upward from the pattern. 

Average rise. The average rise is a smidgen above the average shown by 
all chart patterns (42.4%), placing the performance rank for the pattern at 17 
out of 39 patterns. That’s slightly better than midrange. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. As double bottoms were climbing 43%, 
what was the general market doing? The S&P climbed 13%, helping indi- 
vidual stocks to climb as well. Technically, that’s not really accurate, is it? 

The average is composed of 500 stocks, and as a group, they moved higher 
from the date of the double bottom’s breakout to the date of the ultimate high. 
However, one could argue that the enthusiasm shown by the group encour- 
aged investors and traders to buy stocks and the rising tide lifted all boats. 

Days to ultimate high. How long does it take to reach the ultimate high? 
Answer: 7 months on average. Thus, be patient but do not fall asleep at the switch. 
Not all double bottoms will take that long before starting a massive decline (one 
that either takes price down by more than 20% or below the bottom of the pattern). 

How many change trend? I like to see values above 50% for chart pat- 
terns. To qualify for a trend change, a stock must see price rise more than 20% 
after the breakout. The average for all chart patterns is 55%, so Adam & Eve 
double bottoms slightly outperform the other pattern types. 

Table 27.3 shows failure rates. How do you read the table? Let me give 
you a few examples. In bull markets, 12% of the double bottoms will fail to rise 
more than 5%. Half will fail to rise 25%. 


Table 27.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Number found 1,020 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 
Average rise 43% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% 
Days to ultimate high 216 


How many change trend? 57% 


406 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


Table 27.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market 
5 (breakeven) 125 or 12% 
10 131 or 25% 
15 95 or 34% 
20 83 or 43% 
25 86 or 51% 
30 59 or 57% 
35 62 or 63% 
50 120 or 75% 
75 111 or 85% 
Over 75 148 or 100% 


The table shows how quickly the failure rates rise for a given price climb. 
Notice how failures double (from 12% to 25%) as the maximum price move 
rises from 5% to 10%. 

The table gives you a sense of how difficult it can be to make money trad- 
ing chart patterns. 

Let’s look at this table differently. Suppose you want to make 20% on 
your trade. How often will price fail to see that kind of return? Answer: 43% 
of the time. Thus, you have to let your winners ride and cut your losses short 
before the loss gets so big that brokers can’t afford to close your account. 

Table 27.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. Price breaks out upward all of the time, by defini- 
tion. Remember, for this study a breakout means a close above the highest peak 
between the two bottoms. 

Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance onto the yearly 
price range split into thirds shows that the best performance comes from pat- 
terns with breakouts near the yearly high. Avoid those with breakouts within a 
third of the yearly low. It’s possible that the best performing pattern looks like 
that shown in Figure 27.2, as part of a longer term uptrend. 

I checked this idea and found only 49 patterns where the price trend 
using the trend start was upward, but those double bottoms saw price gain a 
massive 64% compared to the 975 others with downtrends that gained 42%. 

Using another method, the primary trend (which looks back one year 
before the chart pattern), to determine the trend, the results are more mod- 
est. If the primary trend was up, then price gained an average of 42% after 
the breakout compared to gains averaging 44% for those where the primary 
trend was down. 

I will say that I like how the trend of the results shown in Table 27.4 
increases along with which third you’re looking at (that is, gains rise from 38% 


Statistics 407 


Table 27.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the 12-month low (L), L 38%, M 42%, 

middle (M), or high (H) H 47% 
Throwbacks occurrence 67% 
Average time to throwback peaks 7% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 39% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 52% 
Percentage price resumes trend 69% 
Performance with breakout day gap 45% 
Performance without breakout day gap 42% 
Average gap size $0.45 


to 42% to 47%. That’s better than a mix of up and down results like 47%, 
38%, 42%). 

Throwbacks. The next several rows in Table 27.4 concern throwbacks. 
In two out of three samples, the stock throws back to the confirmation price. 
Price rises 7% in just 6 days before reversing. The round-trip takes an average 
of 12 days. 

The penalty a double bottom pays if it has a throwback is big: 17 percent- 
age points. Thus, try to select patterns without nearby overhead resistance that 
might force the stock back down and cause a throwback. 

After a throwback completes, the stock resumes rising (69% of the time, 
anyway). That’s good news. All you have to do is be patient and wait for the 
stock to recover after a throwback. 

Gaps. Breakout day gaps hurt performance, which I find odd. I’ve seen 
this in a few other chart patterns, too. Breakout day gaps usually help perfor- 
mance, not hurt it. 

Table 27.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns outperform short ones, and I find height as one 
of the premier markers of future performance. ‘To use this finding, compute 
the formation height from the highest peak to the lowest low in the pattern 
and divide by the breakout price (the highest high). Compare the result to the 
median. Values above the median mean you have a tall pattern. 

Width. Notice that the two values for width are mirrors of the ones for 
height. Interesting. A statistical anomaly, to be sure. Wide patterns perform 


408 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


Table 27.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Tall pattern performance 48% 
Short pattern performance 38% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 12.5% 
Narrow pattern performance 38% 
Wide pattern performance 48% 
Median width 25 days 
Short and narrow performance 35% 
Short and wide performance 48% 
Tall and wide performance 48% 
Tall and narrow performance 47% 


better than narrow ones. I used the median width as the separator between 
narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. As expected, patterns that are both 
tall and wide outperformed the other combinations, but not by much, except 
for short and narrow patterns. Patterns both short and narrow are the ones 
you'll want to avoid. 

Table 27.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. The volume trend from the first bottom to the second is 
downward most of the time. Does it make a difference? Yes. 

Rising/Falling volume. Patterns that show volume receding have a three 
percentage point performance advantage. That may not sound like much, but 
every little bit helps. Just remember your results may vary. 

Breakout volume. I have read that you should only buy double bot- 
toms if the breakout occurs on heavy volume. Is that true? I found a large six- 
percentage-point difference between patterns with breakout volume above the 
30-day average compared to those with light volume. Even so, I don’t think it’s 
true, but that’s my opinion. Volume (in other types of chart patterns) usually 
doesn’t give the kind of boost many expect. 

Table 27.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I looked back 
at Adam & Adam double bottoms and found they have nearly the same per- 
centages as Adam & Eve patterns. Coincidence or deep state plot? 

If you place a stop-loss order at the bottom of the pattern, the stop will 
hit 3% of the time, on average. However, the loss you may suffer could be quite 
large. Choose a closer stop location, and the potential loss decreases, but the 


Statistics 409 


Table 27.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market 
Volume trend 70% down 
Rising volume trend performance 41% 
Falling volume trend performance 44% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 45% 
Light breakout volume performance 39% 

Table 27.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market 
Pattern top 76% 
Middle 21% 
Pattern bottom 3% 

Table 27.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 48% 
2000s 55% 
2010s 34% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 5% 
2000s 5% 
2010s 20% 


chance of being stopped out increases. In other words, you have to find a stop 
location that works for you and your trading style. 

Table 27.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 2000s was the best performing decade, and 
the worst was the 2010s. That’s not a good omen, is it? 

Failures over time. I counted how often price failed to rise more than 5% 
after the breakout. The rate was constant during the 1990s and the 2000s, but 
spiked in the 2010s. I don’t know the reason for this. Maybe global warming? 

Table 27.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Less than a quarter of the patterns busted, which 
I think is quite good. It says that 23% of the patterns I looked at broke out 


410 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


Table 27.9 
Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market 
Busted patterns count 230 or 23% 
Single bust count 135 or 59% 
Double bust count 64 or 28% 
Triple+ bust count 31 or 13% 
Performance for all busted patterns -16% 
Single busted performance -24% 
Non-busted performance (Adam & Eve double top) -16% 


upward and failed to rise more than 10% before reversing and closing below 
the bottom of the pattern. 

Busted occurrence. Single busted patterns happen most often, which is 
reassuring because they perform best. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared three types of busted 
patterns: the performance of all busted patterns (single, double, and more than 
twice—triple+), single busts, and Adam & Eve double tops. As you know, double tops 
break out downward, so they are a good proxy for a non-busted bearish pattern. 

Single busted patterns performed best. The other two tied for second 
place. If you want to short a stock showing a busted double bottom, then try to 
find a situation where there is little or no underlying support nearby (to help 
prevent a double or higher bust). 


Trading Tactics 


As a bullish chart pattern, you need only know when to buy Adam & Eve dou- 
ble bottoms. Selling is, of course, the tough part. Before you buy, consider the 
trading tactics shown in Table 27.10. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule calculates a target price for the 
stock. Consider the chart pictured in Figure 27.6. To calculate the predicted 
target, first determine the formation height by subtracting the lowest low from 
the highest high in the double bottom. The lowest low in this example occurs 
at the right bottom, with a price of 27.57. The highest high, marked on the 
figure by point A, is 31.09. Add the difference, 3.52, to the confirmation price, 
or the highest high between the two bottoms (that is, 31.09 + 3.52). The result, 
34.61, is the target. 

The chart shows that price met the target in late December. A few days 
after meeting the target, price momentarily descended before resuming its 
climb. During mid-April, the stock reached its ultimate high price of 40.26 
before declining (not shown). 


Trading Tactics 411 


Table 27.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Compute the height from the highest high to the lowest low between 


and including the two bottoms and then add the difference to the 
highest high. The result is the target price. The bottom portion of 
the table shows how often the measure rule works. 
Wait for breakout Always wait for confirmation (a close above the highest high). 
Trade with To improve your odds, trade this bullish pattern in bull markets. 
market trend 
Check others in Are other stocks in the same industry showing bottoming patterns or 
the industry moving up? 


Stop location Table 27.7 shows how often a stop location gets hit. 
Description Bull Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 85% 
Percentage reaching full height target 69% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 48% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 35% 


How often does this method work? The bottom portion of the table 
shows the answer. I used the full height in the above example, and the table 
says it works 69% of the time. Cut the height in half and success increases to 
85%, but profits will likely drop when you sell too early. Use twice or three 
times the height and the success rate drops, but if the target is achieved, you 
could make more money. So use the probabilities shown to estimate how far 
price might rise. 

As a check, consult Table 27.3. For example, the height is 3.52 and the top 
of the pattern is at 31.09 for a potential rise of 3.52/31.09 or 11%. How often 
does price fail to rise more than 10% (the closest to 11%). Answer: 25%. That 
means you’ve a 75% chance of a winning trade, providing you trade it properly. 

Wait for breakout. Once the second bottom of a double bottom occurs, 
you can use the measure rule to set a target. If the potential profit is large 
enough, then wait for the breakout before trading. Point A in Figure 27.6 
shows the confirmation point with a line extending to the breakout point. 

If you decide to trade before waiting for a breakout, 48% of double bot- 
toms will not confirm. That’s almost half. You might be right and can buy in at 
a lower price, but it’s a gamble. 

Trade with market trend. This is turning into a cliché, but a rising 
tide lifts all boats. Another way of saying that is to trade with the trend. Avoid 
making the mistake of being bullish in a bear market, which is like swimming 
against the current. You may still get to where you are going if a barge doesn’t 
run you over. 


412 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


Table 27.11 
Special Features 

Trading Tactic Performance 
Small bottom-to-bottom variation 38% 

Large variation 48% 

Median bottom-to-bottom variation 1% 

Lower left bottom 42% 

Lower right bottom 44% 


Check others in the industry. I find this tactic particularly useful. 
Before I trade, I check other stocks in the same industry. If they are rebound- 
ing or showing bottom reversals, then that gives me confidence that the trade 
will work as expected. If the other stocks are heading down, that increases the 
risk of a failed trade. It may be that this stock is a leading (bullish) indicator for 
the industry, but why take the chance? 

Stop location. Use Table 27.7 to help with stop placement. Be sure to 
convert the potential dollar loss into a percentage of the current price. If the 
loss is too large, then wait for another trade with better probabilities. You don’t 
have to trade this pattern. 

Table 27.11 shows a few special features that double bottoms share. 

Bottom to bottom variation. I computed the median price difference 
between the two bottoms and compared the performance of patterns larger 
and smaller than the median. Those with large price variations outperformed. 

You might think this finding goes against the Identification Guidelines 
where the bottoms should be close in price. Close doesn’t mean exact, and it 
was worth checking if any difference gave an advantage. It does. 

Lower bottom. Patterns with a lower right bottom performed better 
after the breakout than did those patterns with a lower left bottom. Who 
knew? 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Public Service Enterprise Group 


Public Service Enterprise Group (PEG) is an electric utility. I like utility 
stocks because of the dividend checks they send me. In mid-2004, the stock 
formed an Adam & Eve double bottom that confirmed as a valid pattern. 
The stock broke out upward in a strong push higher and just as promptly 


Experience 413 


threw back. It took its time returning to the breakout price but then gapped 
open below the bottom of the double bottom. However, it closed above the 
double bottom’s low. Because it didn’t close below either bottom, it didn’t 
bust the upward breakout. 

Less than 2 weeks later, I bought the stock. From my notebook: “AEDB 
[Adam & Eve double bottom] after throwback. Interest rates are set to rise 
tomorrow 0.25 points, so that’s a negative. This looks like it has bottomed, 
and utilities are the only thing going up in this market (general, S&P market). 
Yield is 5.4%.” 

The stock continued higher. Five days before Christmas word came down 
that Exelon would buy the company for 52.74 per share. Apparently, the smart 
money already knew of this deal. Seven trading days earlier, the stock had 
closed at 43.12, and the day before the announcement it was already at 47.28. 
On the announcement day, the stock closed at 50.56, a tiny premium above the 
prior day’s close. 

Fast forward to 5 March 2005. I must have been getting nervous. The 
stock was trading above the purchase price of the takeover, so I placed at stop 
at 53.33. On 22 March, the stock filled at 53.30. “Sell reason: Hit stop as FED 
[Federal Reserve] raises interest rates.” 


¢ Lesson: If you hold onto a number of quality stocks, some of them will 
be taken over, often at a substantial premium. 


I made 35% including dividends on the trade. In this case, the merger 
fell through in September 2006. By that time, the stock was trading at 72.62, 
far above the takeover price. On the news, the stock only lost about $4 a share. 
The stock reached its ultimate high of 104.60 in January 2008, in the middle of 
the 2007-2009 bear market. In other words, I sold way too soon. 

If I had drawn a trendline connecting the two lows in July and October 
2004 and extended that into the future, it would have taken me out of the trade 
at over $80 a share. 

I don’t know why I used a stop-loss order on the stock. As a long-term 
holding, one paying a good dividend, having a stop in place is unusual for 
me, so I must have been nervous about something, probably the takeover fall- 
ing through. 


¢ Lesson: Sometimes a stop-loss order takes you out of a big winner pre- 
maturely. That’s especially true in buy-and-hold investments. 
Hughes Supply Inc. 


Hughes Supply (HUG) is one of those stocks where I traded it perfectly and 
lost money. A loss doesn’t bother me too much unless it’s large or it happens 
quickly. HUG did both. 


414 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


The stock made the Adam & Eve double bottom in September 1999. The 
day after it broke out upward, I was in the stock at just 6 cents above confirma- 
tion. From my notebook: “12 October 1999. Resistance at 26, support at 22. 
I bought at 23 3/8 [not split adjusted] and expect this to continue rising due 
to hurricane season boosting sales without impacting outlets. That’s the hope. 
Lowes and Home Depot are doing well, but others are not, Fastenal, Building 
Materials Holding. They are probably not a distributor like this co. . . [bought 
because of the double bottom and higher low when compared to low in March. 
There is a bunch of resistance at 26, so I anticipate a stall at 25 1/2 to 25 7/8. 
If it punches through, it’s up, up, and away. Downside is the twin lows at about 
21. Sell at 20 7/8. That’s a downside of 10%.” 

I didn’t log the sale in my notebook, but it happened just 15 days later 
when the stock threw back and continued down. I had a stop a few pennies 
below the lower of the two double bottom lows, and it triggered, handing me 
an 11% loss in just 2 weeks. I like to keep losses to 8% or less, and this happen- 
ing in 2 weeks is like a kick in the pants. 

There’s no lesson to share. Entry and exit were both perfect, except I got 
creamed in between. 


Family Dollar 


The trade in Family Dollar (FDO) didn’t result in a big loss or gain, but it does 
have some things I want to mention. 

In 2005, the stock made an Adam & Eve double bottom. Before con- 
firmation, I bought. From my notebook: “13 October 2005. Bought at: Buy 
stop at 21.70, a penny above the confirmation price of 21.69. Placed after 
the market closed. Stop: 1.5x volatility of 81 cents, so a stop at 19.33 would 
work (below the lowest [double bottom] low). That’s a loss of 10.9%, which 
is a bit on the steep side. But since the market is trending down, it might be 
a smart play. 

“Upside target: 25.50 to 26 for a Big W rise, the site of overhead resist- 
ance in July. Buy reason: AEDB (Adam & Eve double bottom)... This stock 
has been hit (22 stores effectively closed by Katrina), so revenues will be down. 
Earnings came in a few days ago and net sales as of 6 October were up 9.3% 
for 5 weeks ending 1 Oct, SSS [same-store sales] up 2.6% for the period. Book 
score +2.” 

The book score is from my book, Trading Classic Chart Patterns (Wiley, 
2002). Scores above 0 have a greater probability of beating the average rise. Usu- 
ally I scribble down the target calculated by the scoring system but didn’t in 
this case. 

The buy stop triggered the next day and filled at 21.70 to 21.71. This was 
another case of buying before the pattern confirmed, about a week too early. 
But it allowed me to buy in at a lower price than waiting for confirmation. In 
this trade, it made a difference. 


Experience 415 


Let me be clear on this. I placed a buy stop a penny above the confirma- 
tion price of 21.69, and the order filled. However, the pattern didn’t confirm at 
that time. Confirmation happens when the stock closes above the confirmation 
price, and that didn’t happen until about a week later. 

Three days later, I placed a stop-loss order at 20.32. “This is a volatility 
stop because one placed below the double bottom low was too far away, and 
the stock is up this morning. It would have to fall 6% to trigger it. I used the 
low on 14 October at 21.13 — 0.81 to get 20.32.” 

What I want to mention here is that I felt the stop below the bottom of 
the pattern was too far away. So I chose to use a volatility stop instead. 

On 20 October 2005, I placed a buy order that executed the next day 
to buy more shares of the stock, doubling my position. The double bottom 
had confirmed the day before, so this was the optimum entry, made at 22.78, 
the opening price for the stock. The problem was, confirmation was at 21.69, 
which is more than a buck below where I bought. 


¢ Lesson: I often choose to use a buy stop placed a penny above confir- 
mation to get in at a good price even at the risk of a premature breakout 
(the trading price during the day exceeds confirmation but the closing 
price remains lower). 


I did a study on entry methods and found that using a buy stop instead of 
waiting for confirmation actually reduces risk and increases profits. However, 
for statistical purposes, I programmed my computer to wait for confirmation 
and buy at the opening price a day later. 

In this book, I repeat that you should wait for confirmation, but in my 
actual trading, I buy using a buy stop a penny above the confirmation price. 
Why? Here’s what I wrote on my website (http://thepatternsite.com/BestEntry. 
html): “Waiting for confirmation, buying at the open the day after price closes 
above the top of the double bottom, doubles the median rise while cutting the 
failure rate in half. However, the best entry is to place a buy stop a penny above 
the top of the double bottom. That cuts the failure rate and marginally boosts 
the median rise, too.” 

Returning to the 20 October trade, “Buy reason: Good upside breakout 
from the double bottom, especially coming on a day when the Dow was down 
133 points. I wanted to add more to my position because I think this will Big 
W move up to 25.50 to 26. I don’t particularly like the company or its pros- 
pects, but I do think the Dow will recover tomorrow and help keep this stock 
moving up.” 

I like countertrend trades, where the stock is moving up when the Dow 
industrials are dropping, as in this case. I did a study of countertrends, posted 
on my website, about the effectiveness of countertrend trades, but it’s too 
complicated to discuss here, and I’m not sure this stock actually qualified as a 
countertrend stock (I haven’t checked). 


416 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


¢ Lesson: Countertrend trades (when the markets continue lower but 
the stock continues to rise) can suggest better performance. 


Over the following days, I raised the stop four times, chasing price as 
the stock climbed. “8 December 2005. Stop raised to 22.33, just below the 
descending triangle that formed. It’s the smart play.” 

The next day, the stock hit my stop. “Sold at: 22.33, the stop price. Sell 
reason: hit stop. I raised the stop because I felt a downward breakout from the 
descending triangle would mean a giveback of any gains.” 

On the first trade, I made 3% (using a buy stop). On the second trade, I 
lost 2% (waiting for confirmation). 

I mentioned the book score of +2 earlier. If I sold at the ultimate high 
on the first trade, I would have made 63%, handily beating the 44% average 
rise suggested in the book. In other words, the scoring system worked for this 
trade, predicting a good shot of reaching the average 44% rise (if I hadn’t sold 
too soon, that is). 

I sold because of the downward breakout from the descending triangle, 
but the triangle turned into a 5% failure when price resumed rising. It was a 
risk to hold onto the stock longer, so I think I made the correct sell decision 
even though the stock made a substantial rise after I sold. 


¢ Lesson: Sometimes trading well is more important than making money. 
If you trade well, money will often follow (it prevents bad habits from 
forming that can cause big losses). 


Sample Trade 


Lauren is a schoolteacher. Although she loves teaching kids, she would much 
prefer raking in the dough by trading stocks over the Internet. Until that time, 
she shoehorns her investment activities into the few hours of free time she has 
each week. 

“When I spotted the double bottom shown in Figure 27.6,” she placed 
her hand over her heart and said, “I knew it was love at first sight.” 

The rounding bottom pattern (from point A to the breakout) suggested 
higher highs were in store. However, she resisted the temptation to get in early 
because she could not guarantee price would continue moving up. She justified 
her action by pretending that she was teaching her students how to trade. If 
she could not do it properly, how could they? 

“The stock climbed to the confirmation price for the double bottom and 
I was ready to buy. However, when my broker read off the current quote, it had 
soared well above the confirmation price. So I decided to wait and pray for a 
throwback.” 


Sample Trade 417 


Banc One Corp (Bank, NYSE, ONE) 
- 39 
— 38 
37 
- 36 


Ye i, —35 
' 1A yo 


Breakout Bump- 


i 
: . . HH, peti and-Run _ 32 
A Confirmation Line ™ ry “al " Reversal 
ty i -—31 


poo! h, a Stock Bought 30 
f i 


Target Price 


r 
i il 


| Pony 
] 


_ Adam Eve -27 


ih liu : 
nil "Miya il - 29 
eye 


Apr 92 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 27.6 Double bottom trading dilemma. How do you trade this double 
bottom? Do you buy just after the second bottom or wait for price to rise above 
the confirmation point? A rounding bottom appears from point A to the breakout. 


About 4 weeks after the breakout, price dipped to the buy point, but 
would the stock continue down? “I had to wait until I felt confident that price 
would rise.” She changed her mind the next day when price made a higher low. 
It was a gamble, because 2 days of rising prices hardly made a trend. Still, she 
was getting antsy and didn’t want to wait too long and watch price rise above 
the level that she could have bought a month before. So, she bought the stock 
and received a fill at 31.38. 

The following day, volume spiked to over three million shares and price 
jumped over 0.75 points. The spike made her nervous as it reminded her of a 
one-day reversal, but the stock closed at the high for the day, which is odd for 
the reversal pattern. That is when she remembered to place a stop. “I chose a 
price of 30.88, about a quarter point below the recent minor low,” an area of 
prior support. 

The following day price erased lower, but succeeding days saw the stock 
rebound. In mid-December, the stock went ballistic and fulfilled the measure 
rule. “I couldn’t make up her mind if it was worth selling at that point. By the 
time I decided to sell, the stock had returned to the up-sloping trendline” 
(drawn connecting the lows in September through January), so she held on. 

The stock moved up. In late March, the stock jumped sharply, climbing 
almost $1.50 in one day. That was a big move for the stock, and she wondered 
what was going on. She followed the stock closely, and it became obvious the 
stock had entered the bump phase of a bump-and-run reversal. 


418 Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve 


Periodically, as the stock climbed (not shown), she penciled in the sell 
lines parallel to the original bump-and-run reversal trendline. As she looked at 
the chart, she saw the narrow peak appear and knew the end was near. When 
the stock dropped below the nearest sell line, she placed an order to sell her 
holdings and received a fill at 38.63. 

“IT made 22%,” she said and clucked her tongue, “but on an annualized 
basis, I made 60%.” She smiled, knowing that annualized numbers were some- 
thing her math class needed to learn. Now she had the perfect example. 


28 


Double Bottoms, 
Eve & Adam 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Twin bottom pattern with the left bottom wide and rounded looking, but 
the right bottom is narrow and V-shaped. 


Upward Breakouts 


Bull Market 

Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish reversal 
Performance rank 20 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 12% 
Average rise 42% 
Volume trend Downward 
‘Throwbacks 67% 
Percentage meeting price 72% 

target 
See also Double bottoms, Adam & Adam; Double bottoms, 


Adam & Eve; Double bottoms, Eve & Eve 


Of the four combinations of Adam and Eve double bottoms, Eve & Adam is 
the rarest. 

A quick review of the Results Snapshot shows that Eve & Adam doesn’t 
perform as well as two of its brothers. The performance is midway down the 


419 


420 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


list. However, the failure rate rank (not shown) comes in at 12 out of 39 (where 
1 is best). That’s a good showing. 

The volume trend is downward, but only 60% of the time. Even if the 
volume trend is upward, performance doesn’t change much. 

Throwbacks happen in two of every three trades, so that’s reliable. Unfor- 
tunately performance suffers if a throwback occurs. 

Setting a price target and expecting the stock to reach it is lower than 
I like to see, but it’s fine at 72%. You can adjust the height in the measure rule 
calculation to suit your needs. I’ll discuss that in the Trading ‘Tactics section 
later in this chapter. 


Tour 


What does an Eve & Adam double bottom look like? Figure 28.1 shows a 
good example of one. 

Price trended down in a steady decline to the low in June (the Eve bot- 
tom). Volume picked up as price neared the low and then pegged the meter 
at over 1.1 million shares on 18 June, the day price reached a low of 12.69. 
From the March high, the stock declined 47% in 3 months. The high volume 
marked the turning point, and the stock started its recovery. However, a retest 
of the low was in store and price rounded over and headed down again. In late 
August, price made another low (the Adam bottom) when the stock dropped 
to 13.06, also on high volume. 


Fleetwood Enterprises (Manuf. Housing/Rec. Veh., NYSE, FLE) 
- 24 


| I" -23 
| l_oo 
i) 21 
-20 
-19 
vi 
-17 


| 
{]t | 
Li at | | Wi 


Naty I 1 1," 
1 ; eu ‘i -16 


bia til! My -15 
y I i] a 14 


Confirmation Line 


Nh th 


-13 
re Adam ~12 
-11 
-10 
-9 
-8 
Mar 92 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 28.1 Adouble bottom occurs after a downward price trend. High volume 
commonly occurs on the left bottom. 


Identification Guidelines 421 


The day after the low, on a burst of buying enthusiasm, the stock pole 
vaulted and reached the confirmation point in just 2 days. Instead of continu- 
ing upward, however, the stock skidded sideways along the breakout price for 
just over a week before resuming its move upward. By late January, the stock 
reached a high 75% above the breakout price. 

All of that describes how the stock unfolded during 1992. The double 
bottom pattern at the Eve bottom is a gentle rounded turn, looking like a 
small cup. Compare that shape to the Adam bottom. Adam is pointed, narrow, 
and more V-shaped than Eve. ‘Together, they form the Eve & Adam double 
bottom chart pattern, but only when the stock closes above the highest peak 
between those two bottoms. Price after the pattern breaks out makes a won- 
derful recovery, sending price up to near the old high. 


Identification Guidelines 


How do you identify an Eve & Adam double bottom? While it is easy to find 
two bottoms near the same price, it can be difficult to distinguish between the 
combinations of Adam and Eve. 

Figure 28.2 shows another example of the Eve & Adam double bot- 
tom chart pattern. Although the figure does not show the pattern confirming 


Biogen Idec (Biotechnology, NASDAQ, BIIB) 


02 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 03 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 28.2 The Eve bottom appears rounded and wider than the narrow and 
V-shaped Adam bottom. 


422 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


Alaska Air Group, Inc (Air Transport, NYSE, ALK) 


Jo , 
| i hy, hy a ‘ith - 32 
Ml ieee 
| | Confirmation Il bl | - 31 
| 7 \ Line | | 
Wh J gt hn ty 
Wh, i Wt | - 28 
i I I,J | \ il i } 


nat! , ! i _ 
r WY : 
NY 


Adam - 24 


| 
I 
hi 


Eve 


00 Dec Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 28.3 The top of the Eve bottom is wider than the Adam bottom. Eve 
appears rounded and Adam V shaped. The pattern becomes valid once price 
closes above the confirmation line. 


(a close above the highest high between the two bottoms), the pattern does 
confirm (off the chart to the right), meaning that it is a valid double bottom. 

Notice how the two bottoms have different shapes. The Eve bottom is 
wider and rounded-looking. The Adam bottom is more V shaped, narrower, 
and usually composed of one or two large downward price spikes. The Eve 
bottom also has spikes, but they are many and short. 

Figure 28.3 shows another example of an Eve & Adam. This Eve bottom 
has longer spikes than those in the prior figure. The Adam bottom appears V 
shaped, especially in contrast to the wider and more rounded-looking turn of 
the Eve bottom. 

Now that we’ve seen a few examples, let’s talk about identification. 

Table 28.1 lists the guidelines. 

Appearance. Look for two valleys that bottom near the same price. Each 
bottom should be a minor low, not two spikes emanating from the same con- 
gestion region, but be flexible. 

Do the bottoms have a different shape? If yes, then you are on the right 
track. The pattern is either an Adam & Eve or Eve & Adam double bottom. 
The Eve bottom should look rounded and wide (especially near the top of 
the bottom, if that makes any sense). If spikes appear, they should be short 
and bunched together. The Adam bottom should look different from Eve. 
It should be narrower, V-shaped, and usually have a long, one- or two-day 
downward price spike. 


Identification Guidelines 423 


Table 28.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Price trends down into a two-valley pattern. The first valley 


should be a rounded-looking turn. The second should be more 
V-shaped. Both should bottom near the same price. After the 
second valley, price rises. 


Price trend Price trends downward into the start of the pattern and should 
not drift below the left bottom. 


Rise between bottoms Traditionally, the rise between bottoms should be at least 10%, 
but be flexible. | now allow most any value, but tall patterns 
outperform short ones. 


Bottom low price Bottom-to-bottom price variation is small (typically 1%). 
Bottom separation Bottoms should be at least a few weeks apart. The median width 
is 23 days. 
Price rise after Price must close above the confirmation point without first falling 
right bottom below the right bottom low. 
Volume The right bottom tends to see heavier volume. Don’t discard a 


pattern because it has an unusual volume trend (the perfor- 
mance difference is small). 


Breakout direction, The breakout is upward when price closes above the highest peak 
confirmation between the two bottoms. An upward breakout confirms the 

double bottom as a valid chart pattern. If price closes below the 

bottom of the pattern first, then it’s not a valid double bottom. 


Price trend. The pattern does not form in a rising price trend unless it is 
part of a correction (retracement), usually the corrective phase of a measured 
move up. More often, though, the double bottom marks the end of a down- 
trend. The inbound price trend need not be very long, but averages about 
4 months. I excluded any pattern where there was a price dip below the left 
bottom. The pattern should have two bottoms, not three or more. 

Rise between bottoms. Usually tall patterns perform better than short 
ones, so look for the rise between the bottoms to be at least 10%. That’s an 
outdated guideline, so you can allow any value you wish. I set no minimum or 
maximum height restriction. 

Bottom low price. Look for bottoms that have almost the same low 
price. They need not be the same, but the median price variation is small: 1%. 

Bottom separation. I allowed bottoms to be as close or as far apart as 
they felt comfortable, but the median was 23 days. Patterns wider than the 
median outperform. 

Price rise after right bottom. Price should confirm the pattern. Until 
that time, price should not make a third bottom. 

Volume. Most patterns have volume higher on the right bottom, but only 
60% of the time. Heavy breakout volume has no effect on performance, either. 


424 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


Burlington Resources Inc. (Petroleum (Producing), NYSE, BR) 


fs 
i a pS 


- 52 


7 My “4H A r . 


‘\ yf ie 


a 


tha nal\ f 


yh ih 


\ a 
i | Eve - 45 
("| i | Vv - 44 
- 43 
- 42 
- 41 
- 40 
03 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 28.4 An Eve & Adam double bottom with volume higher on the right 
bottom and tepid breakout volume. 


Breakout direction. A breakout happens when price closes above the 
highest peak between the two bottoms. If price closes below the bottom of the 
pattern first, it’s not a valid double bottom. When price breaks out upward, it 
confirms the chart pattern as a valid double bottom. 

Is the twin bottom shown in Figure 28.4 a valid Eve & Adam double bot- 
tom? Running through the characteristics shown in Table 28.1, we find that the 
pattern appears at the bottom of a downward price trend. The two bottoms look 
different—the first one is wider than the second and more rounded-looking, 
too. The second bottom is narrow and V shaped, with a two-day downward 
price plunge. The difference between the two bottom lows is small (1%). The 
separation measures 43 days from bottom low to low. No dips appear on either 
side of the pattern that would turn this into a triple bottom. Volume is heavier 
on the right bottom than the left, and the breakout volume is below average. 

The pattern is valid. Thank goodness; otherwise ’'d have to consider 
replacing the figure. 


Focus on Failures 


What can we learn from failures? Figure 28.5 shows what I call a 5% failure— 
the failure of the stock to climb more than 5% above the breakout. 


Focus on Failures 425 


Butler Manufacturing (Building Materials, NYSE, BBR) 


Confirmation 


! Line 
ay rill - 37 
tH. hs 
If!" I Lull ay | \ rh 
ls ly re li, i 4 "en _ 36 
) | | - 35 
| | | ly ' i fhjly a 
'y irl ‘| | i uf | | 34 
fh . . 
rn r \ it Earnings Warning, th i _ 33 
Hy | Broker Downgrade 
Eve | hy - 32 
Adam - 31 
- 30 
= 29 
ee eee ee _ 28 
97 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 28.5 This is a 5% failure, where price fails to climb much above the 
breakout price. 


The bottom price variation for this double bottom looks wide, but the 
difference is only 4%. If you scan through the identification characteristics 
listed in Table 28.1, you will find that the pattern confirms as a true Eve & 
Adam double bottom. 

Why does price fail to rise much above the confirmation price? The 
answer is typical for these types of failures: overhead resistance. If you were to 
look at the historical price series for the stock, you would find two tops in early 
to mid-1996, at 37+. Those tops either peak at the confirmation line or show 
congestion at or above that price. 

In other words, the peaks highlight a resistance zone right above the break- 
out. In fact, the overhead resistance is so strong that it turns back price in mid- 
1998 (not shown). This double bottom gained just 3% before tumbling 47%. 

On the fundamental side, the company warned in mid-September that 
full-year earnings would fall about 20%, although the company raised its divi- 
dend. A broker downgraded the stock. The stock gapped lower (breakaway 
gap) on the news. 

Did the smart money know about all of this near confirmation? If so, 
then perhaps they started selling, trying to exit before everyone else learned 
of the news. 

In a moment, we’ll see that the 5% failure rate for this chart pattern is 
12%. To flip that around, you have an 88% chance of avoiding a 5% failure. 


426 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


You can still botch the trade or wait long enough for a losing position to turn 
into a winning one. How you trade the stock is up to you. 

Before you buy, make sure you understand the risks, both technical and 
fundamental. Be wary of buying a stock within three weeks of an earnings 
announcement. I learned that lesson the hard way. There are lots of other 
checks you can make, but let’s focus on the numbers. 


Statistics 


Table 28.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. Eve & Adam double bottoms are the rarest variation of 
the four Adam/Eve combinations, as I mentioned. I found only 855 of them 
in 539 stocks but that includes bear market patterns. Those were too few to 
include in the statistics. The first double bottom in the study appeared in July 
1991, and the most recent was in February 2020. Not all stocks covered the 
entire time, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, this bottom 
pattern acts as a reversal of the price downtrend. 

Average rise. The average rise shown in the table is a bit shy of the 
42.4% gain for all chart pattern types. I guess you could say this pattern is an 
average performer. 

However, don’t think that you'll be able to make 42% from your trade. 
The number in the table is an average of hundreds of perfect trades. That 
means buying at the breakout price and selling at the ultimate high. You 
might be able to do that once or twice in real life (I have), but not hundreds 
of times. 

If you place a stop-loss order too close and get stopped out of a promising 
trade, then you’re watching from the sidelines as the stock doubles. 

It can go the other way, too. Buy a stock just before the company 
announces an earnings shortfall and the stock opens 35% lower, handing you 
a loss that stings. 


Table 28.2 
General Statistics 

Description Bull Market 
Number found 759 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 
Average rise 42% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% 

Days to ultimate high 227 


How many change trend? 59% 


Statistics 427 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The S&P 500 index showed an average 
rise of 13%, helping to lift the stocks I studied. The sample times were meas- 
ured from the dates of the breakout and ultimate high of the chart pattern, 
applied to the index. 

Days to ultimate high. A 42% average rise can take a long time to 
achieve (or not. I traded Conseco—now called CNO Financial Group—in 
2009, which doubled in a week). The average time to reach peak performance 
is just over 7 months. That means traders need to be patient while the stock 
struggles to achieve its potential. I suppose it’s like watching your kids grow up. 
They can show promise but stumble along the way. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how many double bottoms 
see price rise more than 20%. Values above 50% I consider good, so this pat- 
tern does well. 

Table 28.3 shows failure rates for the Eve & Adam double bottom. Fail- 
ures are a count of how often a chart pattern fails to meet a given price rise. 
Sounds confusing, doesn’t it? For example, 12% of the stocks will fail to see 
price rise by more than 5%. Almost half will fail to see price rise more than 25%. 

The rate starts out small (if you can call 12% small) but doubles in the 
next row down. Scan down the rows and the increases are alarming. So expect- 
ing a hefty gain from a double bottom might be a dream. 

Table 28.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is upward from a dou- 
ble bottom. A breakout happens when price closes above the highest peak 
between the two bottoms. If that doesn’t happen, then you don’t have a valid 
double bottom. 

Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance over the yearly 
price range, we find that the best performance comes from patterns with 
breakouts in the middle third of the yearly price range. You’ll want to avoid 


Table 28.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market 
5 (breakeven) 88 or 12% 
10 92 or 24% 
15 66 or 32% 
20 63 or 41% 
25 60 or 49% 
30 46 or 55% 
35 51 or 61% 
50 99 or 74% 
75 86 or 86% 


Over 75 108 or 100% 


428 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


Table 28.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 12-month low (L), 
middle (M), or high (H) 


100% up 
L 41%, M 50%, 
H 33% 


Throwbacks occurrence 67% 
Average time to throwback peaks 7% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 39% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 48% 
Percentage price resumes trend 74% 
Performance with breakout day gap 46% 
Performance without breakout day gap 41% 
Average gap size $0.42 


trading double bottoms with the breakout price within a third of the yearly 
high. They perform worst. 

Throwbacks. Throwbacks occur twice every three patterns. When they 
do occur, it takes 12 days on average for the stock to return to the breakout 
price. However, the appearance of a throwback hurts performance. I guess it’s 
like having ants on your food at a picnic. Joy turns to disappointment. After 
a throwback completes, the uptrend resumes most often, so don’t panic-sell 
during a throwback. 

Gaps. If price gaps upward on the day of breakout, it suggests better 
performance. Because I measure performance using the opening price the day 
after the gap, you can buy the stock and still hope to participate in the better 
performance. 

Table 28.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Many chart pattern types have tall patterns outperforming short 
ones, and that’s what we see here. In fact, the performance difference between 
short and tall patterns is quite large. 

For a trading advantage, measure the height of the pattern from the tall- 
est peak (between the two bottoms) to the lower of the two bottoms and divide 
by the price of the tallest peak. If the result is higher than the median shown in 
the table, then you have a tall pattern. 

With such a large performance difference, it’s worth taking the time to 
check if your double bottom is tall and avoid trading short ones unless there’s 
a compelling reason for doing so. 


Statistics 429 


Table 28.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Tall pattern performance 49% 
Short pattern performance 36% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 11.5% 
Narrow pattern performance 38% 
Wide pattern performance 46% 
Median width 23 days 
Short and narrow performance 34% 
Short and wide performance 42% 
Tall and wide performance 48% 
Tall and narrow performance 50% 
Table 28.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Volume trend 60% down 
Rising volume trend performance 41% 
Falling volume trend performance 43% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 42% 
Light breakout volume performance 42% 


Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones. I used the 
median length as the separator between narrow and wide. The performance 
difference is quite large for this item as well. 

Height and width combinations. Tall and wide patterns should pro- 
duce exceptional gains, and they do, but they are not the performance winner 
you’d expect. Rather, tall and narrow double bottoms do best. You’ll want to 
avoid short and narrow ones. They perform worst. 

Table 28.6 shows volume-related statistics for Eve & Adam dou- 
ble bottoms. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most often, but 60% isn’t 
exactly a robust endorsement. Don’t discard a chart pattern because it has an 
atypical volume trend. As we see in the next item, the performance difference 
isn’t worth worrying about. 


430 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


Rising/Falling volume. Patterns with falling volume perform slightly 
better than do those with rising volume. 

Breakout day volume. Does heavy breakout volume suggest better per- 
formance? Not for these chart patterns. I found no performance difference 
between light and heavy breakout day volume. 

Table 28.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the pat- 
tern in half and tabulated how often price returned to various locations on the 
way to the ultimate high. 

For example, if you place a stop-loss order at the bottom of the pat- 
tern, iv ll trigger 3% of the time. That’s a low hit rate, which is good, but the 
potential loss of having the stop at pattern’s bottom could cost you a bundle if 
it triggers. 

When deciding where to place a stop, measure the potential loss and con- 
vert it to a percentage of the stock’s price. If the percentage is too high (some 
say 8% or less is good), then look elsewhere for a lower risk trade. 

Table 28.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 2000s, without counting the two bear mar- 
kets, were the best performing decade. The worst performing decade was also 
the most recent, the 2010s. That’s troubling. Does it mean performance will 
continue to deteriorate? Time will answer that so don’t change the channel. 

Failures over time. Notice how failure rates have increased each decade. 
The failure rate in the 2010s was four times what it was in the 1990s. That’s 
scary, especially if the trend continues. 


Table 28.7 
How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market 
Pattern top 74% 
Middle 20% 
Pattern bottom 3% 

Table 28.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 43% 
2000s 58% 
2010s 35% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 4% 
2000s 7% 


2010s 16% 


Trading Tactics 431 


Table 28.9 
Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market 
Busted patterns count 161 or 21% 
Single bust count 85 or 53% 
Double bust count 48 or 30% 
Triple+ bust count 28 or 17% 
Performance for all busted patterns -15% 
Single busted performance -25% 
Non-busted performance (Eve & Adam double top) -15% 


Table 28.9 shows busted pattern performance. I prefer to trade busted 
patterns where price trends upward after busting, not downward like this pat- 
tern. Upward moves can have unlimited gains, but downward ones can only 
lose 100% of their value. 

Busted patterns count. About one in five patterns will bust. A bust hap- 
pens when price breaks out upward and rises no more than 10% before turn- 
ing down and closing below the bottom of the chart pattern (below the lower 
of the two lows). 

Busted occurrence. Single busted patterns happen most often followed 
by double and triple (or more) busts, respectively. That may sound obvious, but 
a number of times we see three or more busts placing second for frequency. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Single busted patterns perform 
best by seeing price drop an average of 25% below the bottom of the pattern. 
I used Eve & Adam double tops as the proxy for a non-busted double bottom. 
The drop from them matches what we see for the combination of single, dou- 
ble, and three or most busts. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 28.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. To determine how far price may rise, use the 
measure rule: the height of the double bottom (highest high minus lowest low) 
added to the breakout price. 

For example, the double bottom shown in Figure 28.6 has a confirmation 
(or breakout) price of 12.50, and the Adam bottom is the lower of the two bot- 
toms, at 9.00. The difference between the two, 3.50, represents the pattern’s 
height. Add this value to the breakout price (the confirmation line of 12.50) to 
get the target of 16. Price reaches the target in mid-March. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often various heights in 
the measure rule work. For example, the target just calculated uses the full 


432 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


Table 28.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Compute the height of the pattern from the highest high between 


the two bottoms to the lowest bottom low. Add the difference to 
the highest high. The result is the target price. The bottom portion 
of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Wait for breakout Wait for a close above the confirmation point before taking a position. 


Trade with For best results, buy in a bull market. 
market trend 


Check others in To avoid 5% failures, check other stocks in the same industry and 


the industry buy if they are showing bottoming patterns or if their stocks 
are rising. 

Stop location Use Table 28.7 for help placing a stop-loss order. 

Description Bull Market 

Percentage reaching half height target 89% 

Percentage reaching full height target 72% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 52% 

Percentage reaching 3x height 38% 


height. It works, on average, 72% of the time. If you slice the height in half or 
double it, the success rate changes. The table lists targets using various height 
multipliers. 

As a sanity check, consult Table 28.3. For example, we know the height 
of the double bottom shown in the figure is 3.50, and let’s assume the current 
price is the breakout price, 12.50. The height means a potential rise of 28% to 
the target. Let’s call it a 30% rise. Table 28.3 says that 55% of double bottoms 
will fail to see price rise that far. That also means you have a 45% chance of 
having the stock reach the target. 

Wait for breakout. I updated a study of the frequency of unconfirmed 
double bottoms and found that 48% of the time, price did not confirm the 
pattern (price closed below the bottom of the pattern instead of breaking 
out upward). Price must first close above the highest peak between the two 
bottoms to confirm the pattern as valid. Always wait for confirmation unless 
you have a special reason for entering a trade earlier (I can get creative in my 
excuses, such as “I like to lose money” and “The sun was in my eyes.” How 
about you? Any favorites?). 

Trade with market trend. Trade double bottoms in bull markets because 
they are bullish patterns. Even if you make mistakes, a rising tide lifts all boats 
and the market is more forgiving. Trying to trade a bullish pattern in a bear 
market is like being swatted by a rolled-up newspaper. It could hurt. 


Experience 433 


Table 28.11 
Special Features 

Trading Tactic Performance 
Small bottom-to-bottom variation 39% 

Large variation 45% 

Median bottom-to-bottom variation 1% 

Lower left bottom 45% 

Lower right bottom 39% 


Check others in the industry. Are other stocks in the same industry 
doing well? Are they showing bottom reversal patterns (double or triple bot- 
toms, head-and-shoulders bottoms, that sort of thing)? If many companies in 
the industry are doing well, that should give other investors the courage to buy 
the stock and add to demand. That activity reduces your chance of a small gain. 

However, if stocks in the industry look sick, what makes you think this 
stock will do well after the breakout? It will be swimming against the indus- 
try current. 

If the industry is weak, save yourself some money, aggravation, and avoid 
the stock. Look for a more promising chart pattern in another industry. 

Stop location. Table 28.7 shows how often three locations in the double 
bottom will trigger a stop-loss order if it’s placed there. That gives you an idea 
of how often you may be stopped out, so visit with the results and tell them 
‘Tom sent you. 

Table 28.11 shows special features for the Eve & Adam double bot- 
tom pattern. 

Bottom to bottom variation. I computed the price variation from bot- 
tom low to bottom low and then measured the performance for those double 
bottoms with a price variation larger and smaller than the median. If the bot- 
toms were uneven by more than the median, they tended to perform better. 
We’ve seen this result for other double bottoms types, too. 

Lower bottom. Double bottoms with a left bottom below the price of the 
right bottom tended to perform better after the breakout. To me, this makes 
sense because a higher second bottom suggests more buying enthusiasm near 
the old low. People started buying the stock before it reached the price of the 
prior bottom, halting the decline. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


434 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


Alaska Air Group 


This is one of those trades where I look at the chart and thank the stars I sold 
in time. It happened in March 2001 when the stock in Alaska Air Group (ALK) 
formed the Eve bottom. In late June, the Adam bottom was in place. The pat- 
tern confirmed in mid-July as a valid Eve & Adam double bottom. 

Here’s my notebook entry: “23 July 2001. I bought at 32.19, at market. 
The stock has completed a confirmed Eve & Adam double bottom coupled 
with an upside earnings surprise on 19 July. The stock has moved higher but 
may have overhead resistance at 32-33, where it is now trading. I expect it to 
push through this region, then post new highs.” 

The earnings announcement may be the reason I didn’t buy when the 
double bottom confirmed or even why I didn’t have a buy stop ready to get me 
into the trade. 


¢ Lesson: Avoid buying shares within 3 weeks of an earnings 
announcement. 


“Oil prices are falling, but OPEC is expected to tighten the spigot in coming 
weeks, putting upward pressure on fuel prices. Economy is slow, but some predict 
it’s bottoming. The airline is one of the few still profitable. Sell in the early Spring 
when the market for airline stocks usually goes soft (strong starting in the fall). 
Upside is 38, another mild resistance zone. Downside is 28, a prior support zone 
in March through June 2000 on weekly scale. That would put the loss at a rather 
steep 13%. That region is also just below the double top high, a likely support 
zone. This is a risky trade due to overhead resistance so I limited the position size.” 

The stock cooperated by moving sideways for a week but then easing 
higher, forming what looked like a rounded top. 

Here’s the sell details: “6 September 2001.1 put a stop at 31.50 this morn- 
ing and it was hit. The stock has breached a support level, and with weakness 
in the economy and September/October upon us, it’s time to leave with a small 
loss. I should have bought at the breakout price.” 

On the trade, I lost 2%. Here’s the kicker, and the date says it all: Five 
days later was 9/11. The stock market didn’t open for a week, and when it did, 
the stock was down to 22.24. It bottomed near the end of the month, at 17.40, 
a drop of 45% below the sale price. I sold the stock just in time and escaped 
being slaughtered. 


¢ Lesson: Sometimes you don’t know how well you have traded until 
well after the sale. 


Cache 


I was going to show you a chart of this trade, but there’s not much to see. Com- 
ing off the 2007-2009 bear market, Cache (CACH) dropped and bounced, 


Experience 435 


forming an Eve & Adam double bottom, with the second bottom in March 
2009, bottoming just 3 days before the bear market officially ended (I didn’t 
know it at the time, of course). 

The chart pattern confirmed on 26 March, turning the squiggles into a 
valid double bottom. Price moved up in a nice straight-line run, and I bought 
when it formed a handle of a cup. That’s what it looked like. On the left of the 
chart was the left rim, then the double bottom, and a right rim mirroring the 
one on the left. A handle 18 days long followed, and I bought about midway 
in that handle. 

From my notebook: “9 April 2009. Buy reason: S&P rates stock a hold. 
Has nearly 0 [long-term] debt. Has TONS of insider buying since September 
but share sizes are unimpressive (20k largest, 936 shares, smallest). Ford has 
strong sell. 3 of 5 ratios are at bottom. P/E [price to earnings] is [not appli- 
cable because they didn’t make a profit] and [price to cash flow] is midrange 
since cash flow has dried up. Earnings are negative. Late to a confirmed Eve & 
Adam double bottom.” 

Upside target was 8, 13, and 16 with a potential stop of 2.63 or 19.7% 
below the current price. With a stop so far away, I didn’t place it. I think this 
was a buy-and-hold-type trade, one where I often don’t use a stop. 

Confirmation of the double bottom was at 2.29, and I bought at 3.10, or 
35% above the optimum entry. So that was really awful. 


¢ Lesson: Bottoms are often V-shaped. Tops are more rounded appear- 
ing. You have to be quicker to buy at a bottom than to exit at a top. 

¢ Lesson: Buy as close to confirmation as you can. It helps limit risk and 
increase profit. 


I’m not sure why I didn’t buy earlier, but I knew by the entry I was late, as 
my notebook entry acknowledges. 

The closest target was 8, far above the 3.10 buy price. Why so far away? 
The bear market sucked the stock down quickly from a peak at 13.90 to a 
low of 1.41, or a 90% drop in 3 months. On the weekly scale, it looked as if 
the stock stepped off a cliff. So there weren’t many pauses along the way that 
would make for good resistance targets on the way back up. 

Having resistance far above the current price isn’t a bad thing, really. You 
can hope that price doesn’t pause along the way to the target, but that’s often 
wishful thinking. 

In 2008, the stock made a slowly rising channel from 8 to 15, so that’s 
where it called home. I was hoping it would return home, but it only got 
halfway there. 

After I bought, the stock cooperated, though, helped by traders returning 
to a bull market. The stock climbed to 5 and then turned right. It retraced back 
to a low of 3.20 in July 2009, and peaked at 7.25 in the spring of 2010 (which 
would have been a wonderful time to sell). After that, the stock made a dip that 
dropped the stock in half before bringing it back up. 


436 Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam 


For the sale, I have two notebook entries, one on the day before the sale: 
“10 January 2012. Order details: Sell limit order, day, at 5.93. Sell reason: 
Broker downgraded the stock, and I want to exit the women’s apparel stocks. 
I’m taking the profit with a market order at the open tomorrow. This is trading 
near the yearly high, and it’s a good time to exit. I expect a downward breakout 
from the ascending triangle. Since this is so thinly traded, I’m hoping I can get 
a good fill but doubt it. I changed the market order to a limit order near the 
day’s open today (Tuesday).” 

The ascending triangle started in May 2011 and lasted to January 
2012, about a week after I sold, with an upward breakout. That’s a hint that 
I sold too soon. 

Here’s my notebook for the day I sold: “Sell reason: Fundamentals, 
weakness. If the prediction is right that the market will drop in March, I am 
liquidating my stocks that show gains and are looking to drop. This recently 
peaked, but I don’t like the industry (women’s apparel) and a broker downgraded 
the stock.” 

I sold near the bottom touch of the triangle, almost 3 months before 
the stock peaked at 7.88. After that, it was a steady drop to 2.00 in December 
(a 75% decline). 

My instincts on this trade were good, helped by the ending of the bear 
market where almost anything you buy soars. I bought in late, left early, and 
made 86%. Annualized, that’s a gain of 31% a year, which is wonderful, too. 


¢ Lesson: The end of a bear market provides wonderful opportunities 
for stocks to recover. All you need is the courage and the cash to buy. 
I bought in late, left early, and almost doubled my money. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 28.6 shows a trade Willie made in the stock. He ran through Table 28.1 
and checked the identification characteristics against the pattern. Briefly, the 
stock price was trending down to the first bottom of the double bottom. 

The Eve bottom caused him concern because the twin spikes were long 
but separated by a few days. Was the Eve bottom really an Adam bottom, or 
was it a narrow Adam & Adam double bottom by itself? 

The Adam bottom had a shorter spike. Was it an Eve bottom? He looked 
above the spikes and saw that the Eve bottom was several weeks wide but the 
Adam bottom remained narrow over most of its height. He concluded that the 
pattern was an Eve & Adam double bottom. 

The rise between bottoms was over 10%, and the bottoms looked to be 
about 6 weeks apart. Volume was higher on the left bottom than the right, 
spelling good news for performance. 


Sample Trade 437 


Checkpoint Systems (Precision Instruments, NYSE, CKP) 


hm - 18 


a - 17 
ta Hy i‘ 16 
ull i ) Ascending i | - 


Scallop |! - 14 
| 


| i 
lL) ee ! if l I, i said Y- bs 
ine i ; 
W Ni | fh | J ae < 


H ought 
iy It Wie En = 
v 


rl 
Adam 


01 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 02 Feb Mar Apr May ne 
Figure 28.6 As described in the Sample Trade, Willie bought early into this Eve 
& Adam double bottom. He sold when price dropped below the narrowing, 
ascending scallop. 


“T watched the pattern develop, and lo and behold, a head-and-shoulders 
bottom appeared before my very eyes.” He drew in the down-sloping neckline 
and when price closed above it, confirming the head-and-shoulders bottom, he 
bought the stock and received a fill at 11.00. After that, it took just 2 days for 
price to confirm the double bottom pattern. 

“T rode the stock higher like I was competing in a rodeo, and the stock 
took on the shape of an ascending scallop”—a rounded turn with a right han- 
dle. “When the second scallop appeared, I got concerned.” Sometimes, consec- 
utive ascending scallops get narrower as they appear higher in the price trend. 
An unusually narrow one sometimes appears just before price peaks. 

“So I decided to sell as soon as price dropped below the scallop bowl. 
That occurred in early May,” and he received a fill at 14.93, for a net gain of 
35%—and that was in a bear market. 


29 


Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A twin bottom pattern with wide, rounded bottoms. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market 

Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish reversal 
Performance rank 5 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 12% 
Average rise 50% 
Volume trend Downward 
‘Throwbacks 65% 
Percentage meeting 65% 

price target 
See also Double bottoms, Adam & Adam; Double bottoms, 


Adam & Eve; Double bottoms, Eve & Adam 


The Eve & Eve double bottom is what many refer to as the classic “double 
bottom.” It sports two rounded bottoms, well separated, with a rounded climb 
between them. That is the ideal pattern, but few look like that in the real 
world. 

Of the four varieties of double bottoms, the Eve & Eve double bottom 
has the highest average rise—50%—in bull markets, ranking 5 out of 39 where 
a rank of 1 is best. I can see why this chart pattern is a classic. The performance 


438 


Tour 439 


rank is more than three times better than the other three varieties of Adam 
and Eve double bottoms. Not only that, but it has a comparatively low break- 
even failure rate, 12%, ranking 13 out of 39 (not shown). What more could a 
trader want? 

Let’s take a look at this double bottom variant. 


Tour 


What does an Eve & Eve double bottom look like? Figure 29.1 shows a good 
example of the twin Eve bottom. This double bottom forms after a broadening 
bottom chart pattern (the pattern on the left of the chart). The two Eve bot- 
toms are wide, rounded, and distinct lows separated so that they are not part of 
the same congestion region. The rise between the two bottoms in this example 
measures an unusually tall 40%. In March, price closed above the highest high 
in the pattern, confirming the twin bottom as a true double bottom. 

Why does a double bottom form? All chart patterns show the struggle 
between buying demand and selling pressure. When price drops to a point 
where traders view the stock as a steal, they buy. If buying demand is high 
enough, the stock moves up in price. That is why the bottom usually shows 
a volume spike or high volume. In a double bottom, selling pressure balances 


ENSCO International (Oilfield Svcs/Equipment, NYSE, ESV) 


Kl re bis 
Jy WE 
| - 16 


i - 15 


Ml H ' I Hh i h | i 13 
Ml | I 


i] Confirmation Price 
i j - 12 


\ 
il h \ | Ml | | ae _ 


: 
| phn yh Wy - 


— Eve =°g 


5 
98 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99_ Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 29.1 A broadening bottom leads to an Eve & Eve double bottom. The 
two Eve bottoms are wide and rounded appearing. Price climbed 67% after 
the breakout. 


440 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


buying demand, making the bottom turn long and gentle as bulls and bears 
struggle for dominance. 

When buying demand prevails, price rises and continues to rise until sell- 
ers, viewing the stock as overbought, take profits. This selling pressure eventu- 
ally stalls the upward move. When other traders see the upward momentum 
slowing, they dump their shares and down goes the stock. 

When price drops to a low enough level, the smart money accumulates 
shares again, sometimes quietly and sometimes not. Others see the slowing 
downward price trend and predict a turn. They buy, too. 

As price pulls out of its dive, more traders buy and the second Eve bottom 
forms as a gentle rounded-looking turn, often near the price of the first bot- 
tom. Price begins climbing again. When it approaches the high between the 
two bottoms, it often stalls there as traders take profit. 

In a confirmed double bottom, the selling pressure does not send the 
price down again. Instead, traders sense the intrinsic strength and buy. This 
buying demand forces the price to tick up, moving above the high between the 
two bottoms. That is the breakout signal. It turns squiggles on the price chart 
into a valid double bottom. 

Technical traders watching from the sidelines buy the stock in droves. 
Volume skyrockets along with price. Reluctant sellers dump the stock to eager 
buyers. Price climbs for several days and then things change. About two-thirds 
of the time, price throws back to the breakout price. The throwback is brief 
before price gathers strength and rises again, soaring to new highs. 


Identification Guidelines 


I find identifying Eve & Eve double bottoms is easier than identifying birds, 
but, in both cases, you have to know what to look for. Not just any two bottoms 
at the same price will suffice for an Eve & Eve double bottom. 

Listed in Table 29.1 are guidelines that make correct selections easier. 
While considering the guidelines, look at Figure 29.2. 

Appearance. Assign each double bottom pattern into its Adam and Eve 
category. Adam bottoms are narrow and V shaped, perhaps with a one- or two- 
day downward price spike. Eve bottoms are wide, rounded turns. They may 
also have price spikes, but they are usually shorter and more plentiful. 

Price trend. The stock shown in the figure begins declining in mid- 
October 1993 (not shown) from a price of about 56.50. It bottoms out at about 
41.50 in mid-May, forming the first Eve bottom. Price never drops below the 
left low on the way to the first bottom. The reason for this guideline is to avoid 
triple bottoms or those patterns that do not act as reversals. 

The two points marked A and B represent an incorrectly selected double 
bottom because point A has lower lows to the left of it. It acts as a continuation 
of the upward price trend and not a bottom reversal. 


Characteristic 


Identification Guidelines 441 


Table 29.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


Appearance 
Price trend 


Rise between bottoms 


Bottom low price 


Bottom separation 


Price rise after 
right bottom 


Volume 


Breakout direction, 
confirmation 


i 
Ih Ny Nu K , i 
yh i 


le 


Apr 94 May Jun 


Look for two valleys that appear after a downtrend. Each valley 
should be wide and rounded-looking. After that, price rises. 
Price trends downward to the pattern and should not drift below 

the left bottom. 

Most any height will do, but taller is better. The traditional 
measure is at least 10% from the lowest valley to the highest 
peak between the two bottoms. 

Bottom-to-bottom price variation is small. The median is 1%. 


Bottoms should be at least a few weeks apart, but allow 
exceptions. 


Price must close above the confirmation point without first falling 
below the right bottom low. 


Usually higher on the left bottom than the right. 
The breakout is upward by definition. Price has to close above 


the highest peak between the two bottoms. When that 
happens, it confirms the pattern as a valid double bottom. 


General Mills Inc (Food Processing, NYSE, GIS) 
-54 


~ 
= 
-51 


! 
' y" i ~50 
48 


iW Hi ” - 
nN Ane M y y W = 
| i Af \ ind 45 
ll \ ii Nes iti 

MN -43 

/ ie 
. 


- 38 
Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar 


Confirmation Level 


Eve 


Figure 29.2 Points A and B do not depict a double bottom because there are 
lower lows to the immediate left of point A. 


Rise between bottoms. When I first started studying double bottoms, 
lots of books said that the rise between the two bottoms should be at least 
10%, as measured from the lowest bottom low to the rise high. None of them 
proved it or said why it’s important. I threw away that requirement and decided 


442 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


to let the pattern tell me how tall it should be. I found that taller is better, so 
the 10% guideline is fine (although I allow many shorter patterns). 

Bottom low price. The bottom-to-bottom price variation should be 
small. The basic rule is that the two bottoms should appear near one another 
on the price scale. The figure shows a price variation of about 1%. That value 
matches the median difference, too. 

Bottom separation. The two bottoms should be at least a few weeks 
apart but that’s an arbitrary value. Eve turns are frequently wide enough to 
require a few weeks to complete (not always, of course). Many bottoms in a 
double bottom are separated by several months, like the one shown. A month 
is the minimum separation that many professionals view as leading to powerful 
rallies. I set a lower standard to help verify that this is true. It is. 

Price rise after right bottom. Price should rise up to the confirmation 
price without first making a third bottom. 

Volume. The volume chart for double bottoms usually shows the highest 
volume occurring on the left bottom. Diminished volume appears on the right 
bottom, and the volume trend of the overall chart pattern is downward. 

None of these are absolute rules. Sometimes volume is highest on the 
right bottom instead of the left. Don’t discard a chart pattern because of an 
unusual volume pattern. 

Breakout direction. All double bottoms break out upward by definition. 
If they don’t, then they are not double bottoms. What is a breakout? It happens 
when the stock closes above the highest peak between the two bottoms. 

Confirmation. The confirmation point is the same as the breakout price. 
It’s the highest high between the two bottoms. It’s when squiggles on a price 
chart become a valid double bottom. 

Why wait for confirmation? In a study I did, I found that 48% of the time 
price broke out downward from a twin bottom pattern instead of confirming 
it as a valid double bottom. Thus, if you buy before confirmation, on average, 
you'll likely lose money nearly half the time. 

Now that you know what a double bottom looks like, let’s discuss how to 
separate the bottoms into their proper Adam or Eve category. 

Figure 29.3 shows another example of an Eve & Eve double bottom but 
one harder to identify. Both bottoms have a one-day downward spike, which 
is more typical of an Adam bottom. However, as your gaze moves up, the bot- 
tom widens. If you were to shave off that one day’s growth, you would have a 
rounding turn on both bottoms. Adam bottoms are narrower and usually taller. 
Adam bottoms often have price spikes (one or two), but they are longer than 
what you see on Eve bottoms. 

A good example of an Adam bottom occurs in December when price 
plunges downward for three days. The bottom looks narrow and pointed, not 
wide and rounded. Notice the difference between the Adam and Eve bottoms. 

When trying to determine whether the double bottom has Adam or Eve 
components, ask yourself if the two bottoms look similar (Adam & Adam or 


Focus on Failures 443 


Applied Materials (semiconductor Cap Equipment, NASDAQ, AMAT) 


ly — 17 
“te : 15 
jt" 14 
ye I ee 
- 12 
yl th | - 
\ r hy ha " - 10 
fh, tual Mm, y wit i = 
1 ly i il \ i " i! Adam 
al bi Mtn | =8 
In ih il y ik 
il I | TT Confirmation Line -7 
Lida tt | 

I Wa mm - 6 

eae 

Eve Eve 
-5 
- 4 

| 
98 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99_ Feb Mar 3 


Figure 29.3 These two Eve bottoms are wider and more rounded than the Adam 
bottom in December, despite having one-day downward price spikes. 


Eve & Eve) or different (Adam & Eve or Eve & Adam). If they look the same, 
are the bottoms wide or narrow, pointed or rounded? 

Let us look at another example, Figure 29.4. The left Eve bottom is 
narrower than the right one, and it looks like a widely spaced horn (it has 
two minor lows). The right bottom looks wide, but it is V shaped. Are these 
Adam bottoms? 

Sometimes the answer lies not in the bottoms themselves, but in the sur- 
rounding landscape. I searched the stock for examples of Adam and Eve bottoms 
and they appear in the inset. Clearly, the differences between the two are startling. 
Compare each inset with the alleged Eve & Eve double bottom. Which inset looks 
like the double bottom? I think the Eve inset matches each Eve bottom. 

Trying to figure out if you’re looking at Eve or Adam is subjective. I 
computerized the identifying of Adam and Eve bottoms to provide consistency 
across my research. 


Focus on Failures 
Figure 29.5 is a test. Is this an Eve & Eve bottom or an Eve & Adam? The 


answer is, of course, who cares? The stock failed to climb much after the break- 
out, and I consider losing money more important than identification. 


444 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


Devon Energy Corp (Natural Gas (Diversified), AMEX, DVN) 


" 4 
ay 
lal 
Eve 
Adam 


a, eth i | - 36 


Ik i I | 


| | iw Confirmation Line - 26 

| eS : 

' i 

a | it | Ry \ 24 
7 


96 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 97 


Figure 29.4 Two minor lows compose the left Eve bottom, and the right bottom 
appears V shaped. 


Flowserve Corp (Machinery, NYSE, FLS) 


byt a = 
i" || - Overhead Resistance 
- 20 
iy 


t 
| il ‘it Overhead Resistance - 19 


| \ Confirmation = - 18 
; ' Thay pay | i \, -17 
| Ms ra iat hy m4 i‘ ily tinh ae 
7 Nees aa 
Eve Eve or er B 15 
-14 
| = 13 
| 
y ~ 12 
thy 
=T11 
- 10 
99 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan0O Feb Mar 


Figure 29.5 Is this an Eve & Eve bottom or an Eve & Adam bottom, and why did 
price fail to rise far? 


Statistics 445 


The left Eve bottom most would argue is a true Eve bottom. It appears 
wide and rounded, not needle-sharp like an Adam bottom. What about the 
right bottom? No one- or two-day price spike appears. It does look V shaped if 
you consider the V as slanting to one side. Does it look like the Eve bottom at 
point A or the Adam bottom at point B? My computer says this double bottom 
is an Eve & Eve pattern. 

Why did price not climb far after the breakout? I have highlighted two 
overhead resistance zones. The top one looks strong enough to turn back most 
advances (because it’s wide and flat). The lower one is a solid block in late 
June (at A), but it’s short. It extends back to April, but April is looser looking. 
Tighter is often better than loose (I measured this). 

Before the April to August price bump, the stock was in a long-term 
decline. A block of horizontal price movement appeared at 17.50 that was 3 
months long (not shown) if you include some minor lows. Thus, the reason 
the Eve & Eve pattern failed to rise was overhead resistance coupled with a 
deteriorating fundamental picture. 

I like to know what is going on in the stocks I follow. I keep a database 
of events and can match an event to the price action. The company released 
earnings on both sides of the April/August price bump. The first release helped 
power price up, and the second helped cut it down. During creation of the 
Eve bottom, news appeared that machine tool orders were soft (down 2%) 
month-to-month and down 30% from the prior year. Coupled with increased 
foreign competition and insider selling, the fundamentals were turning bad. 
That information did not help the technical picture. 


Statistics 


Table 29.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,093 patterns in 675 stocks from September 
1991 to February 2020. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some 
stocks no longer trade. Because bear market samples didn’t rise to the threshold 


Table 29.2 
General Statistics 

Description Bull Market 
Number found 952 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 
Average rise 50% 
Standard & Poor's 500 change 13% 

Days to ultimate high 222 


How many change trend? 61% 


446 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


I set for this edition, I don’t include them in this presentation. That’s why I 
show fewer than 1,000 patterns in the table. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Because price enters the 
chart pattern from the top and exits out the top, the pattern acts as a reversal 
of the downward price trend, by definition. 

Average rise. The average rise in bull markets is one of the better perfor- 
mances I have seen for chart patterns. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The strong general market upswing 
(13%) in bull markets helped carry along the chart pattern’s average rise 
(50%). I can’t say whether that’s really true, but a rising tide lifts all boats. I’m 
beginning to dislike that cliché, though, because I use it too much. I guess it 
wouldn’t be a cliché if people like me didn’t use it. 

Days to ultimate high. How long does it take price to top out? Answer: 
about 7 months. If you want to reach the ultimate high, it will take a long time 
for a stock to rise 50%. The duration is an average, though. The median is just 
71 days (about 10 weeks). 

How many change trend? Out of 39 chart patterns, the Eve & Eve dou- 
ble bottom ranks 8 where a rank of 1 is best. I like to see values above 50%, and 
this chart pattern far exceeds that. By the way, I added this measure to count 
how many double bottoms see price rise more than 20% after the breakout. 
It was my attempt to determine if a chart pattern led to a sustained trend. 

Table 29.3 shows failure rates for double bottoms. Let me give you some 
examples of how you read this table. In bull markets, 12% of the patterns failed 
to see price rise more than 5% after the breakout. Twenty-three percent didn’t 
exceed a 10% rise. 

Notice how failure rates nearly triple (to 32% from 12%) for rises of 
no more than 15%. Half the patterns will stop climbing before reaching 
30%. This alarming progression of failures is typical for all chart patterns. 


Table 29.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market 
5 (breakeven) 111 or 12% 
10 104 or 23% 
15 92 or 32% 
20 60 or 39% 
25 73 or 46% 
30 65 or 53% 
35 51 or 58% 
50 105 or 69% 
75 113 or 81% 


Over 75 178 or 100% 


Statistics 447 


Table 29.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the 12-month low (L), L 52%, M 47%, 

middle (M), or high (H) H 52% 
Throwbacks occurrence 65% 
Average time to throwback peaks 8% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 46% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 57% 
Percentage price resumes trend 72% 
Performance with breakout day gap 53% 
Performance without breakout day gap 49% 
Average gap size $0.45 


It emphasizes that making money using chart patterns isn’t as simple as buying 
the first one you see. 

Table 29.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is always upward from a 
double bottom. If the double bottom breaks out downward first (a close below 
the bottom of the lowest valley), then it’s not a valid double bottom. 

Yearly position, performance. Where are the best performing double 
bottoms located? The performance numbers are closer than I expected, but it’s 
clear that you want to avoid patterns with breakouts in the middle third of the 
yearly high-low price range. 

Throwbacks. Throwbacks occur about two-thirds of the time. They give 
investors another opportunity to take a position in a stock or to add to an exist- 
ing position. When price does throw back, it takes 12 days (on average) from 
the stock to return to the breakout price. That suggests price peaks in less than 
a week (which it does: 6 days after rising 8%) and then drops back. 

Notice that patterns having a throwback pay a penalty for performance. 
After a throwback completes, price resumes rising 72% of the time. That means 
the other 28% continue lower. So there’s a risk when a throwback occurs. 

Gaps. Breakout day gaps help performance in bull markets. I meas- 
ured performance from the opening price the day after the gap to the ulti- 
mate high, so even if you miss owning the stock when a gap happens, you can 
still participate in the better performance. The numbers are averages, so your 
results may vary. 


448 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


Table 29.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market 
Tall pattern performance 50% 
Short pattern performance 49% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 14.7% 
Narrow pattern performance 47% 
Wide pattern performance 53% 
Median width 36 days 
Short and narrow performance 47% 
Short and wide performance 54% 
Tall and wide performance 52% 
Tall and narrow performance 45% 


Table 29.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. The results surprise me because tall patterns usually perform 
significantly better than short ones. That is still true, but the performance dif- 
ference is minimal (one percentage point). 

To use this result, measure the double bottom’s height from the high- 
est high between the two bottoms to the lowest low in the pattern and then 
divide by the highest high (the breakout price). If the result is smaller than the 
median listed in the table, then you have a short pattern. 

The median values (31% rise for tall patterns versus 24% for short ones) 
show a bigger difference, so checking for height is a task you should consider. 
Trade only tall patterns unless you have good reasons for doing otherwise. 

Width. I measured the pattern width from lowest low in the left bottom 
to the right bottom low. Those patterns wider than the median performed 
substantially better than narrower ones. I’ve been seeing that trend in many 
patterns (that is, wide patterns beating narrow ones), but the indicator isn’t as 
good as height in predicting future performance. 

Height and width combinations. If you look at the table and see tall 
patterns perform best and wide patterns perform best, you’d expect the combi- 
nation of tall and wide to beat the performance of the other combinations. But 
that’s not what happens here. Short and wide patterns come in first place and 
tall and wide place second. You'll want to avoid tall and narrow ones, though 
(they perform worst). 

Table 29.6 shows volume-related statistics. I removed volume shapes 
because for wide patterns, volume often formed different shapes within the 
pattern and determining the actual shape was too subjective. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most of the time, but don’t 
discard a chart pattern simply because it has a rising volume trend. 


Statistics 449 


Table 29.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market 
Volume trend 63% down 
Rising volume trend performance 50% 
Falling volume trend performance 49% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 48% 
Light breakout volume performance 55% 

Table 29.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market 
Pattern top 77% 
Middle 18% 
Pattern bottom 2% 


Rising/Falling volume. Indeed, a rising volume trend Eve & Eve double 
bottom shows slightly better performance than one with falling volume. How- 
ever, the difference may not be statistically significant. 

Breakout day volume. Many technical analysts will say that heavy 
breakout volume suggests strong performance and you should avoid pat- 
terns with light breakout volume. These statistics say the opposite, that 
patterns with breakout day volume below the 30-day average show better 
performance. 

Table 29.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the dou- 
ble bottom into pieces (half, really) and found that if a trader placed a stop at 
the bottom of the pattern, the stop would trigger an average of 2% of the time. 
The other two locations show higher hit rates. 

You can use this information to help you decide where to place a stop 
(or if you should even use a stop). Just remember that a stop too far away may 
entail a substantial loss. 

You might take the time to convert the potential loss into a percentage of 
the current price (divide the two and multiple by 100). If the percentage makes 
your hair stand up, be thankful you still have hair and consider adjusting your 
stop placement. 

Table 29.8 shows the performance over three decades. Here’s where the 
ride gets bumpy. 

Performance over time. The 2010s showed the worst performance 
and the 2000s the best. I am concerned that the most recent decade had 
the worst performance. Does that mean performance going forward will 
struggle, too? 


450 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


Table 29.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 46% 
2000s 60% 
2010s 41% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 8% 
2000s 6% 
2010s 20% 
Table 29.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market 
Busted patterns count 189 or 20% 
Single bust count 100 or 53% 
Double bust count 67 or 35% 
Triple+ bust count 22 or 12% 
Performance for all busted patterns -15% 
Single busted performance -23% 
Non-busted performance (Eve & Eve double top) -16% 


Failures over time. Here the differences are startling, with failures tri- 
pling in the 2010s from the prior decade. Note that I removed the bear mar- 
kets from all of the numbers in the table (bear markets only happened in the 
2000s). Failures, by the way, are a count of how many chart patterns failed to 
see price rise more than 5% after the breakout. 

Table 29.9 shows busted pattern performance. I prefer to see bearish 
patterns bust, not bullish ones (as in the case of a busted Eve & Eve dou- 
ble bottom). 

Busted patterns count. One of every five double bottoms will bust. 
That means price will rise no more than 10% before collapsing and closing 
below the lower of the two bottoms. 

Busted occurrence. Single busted patterns happen most often, which is 
typical. If you’re confused about what a single, double, or triple+ bust means, 
consult the Glossary. There, I have included a picture for your viewing pleas- 
ure. Don’t forget to bring the popcorn. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used Eve & Eve double tops 
to gauge the performance of non-busted patterns. Only single busted double 
bottoms outperformed the non-busted counterparts. 


Trading Tactics 451 


Trading Tactics 


Table 29.10 shows trading tactics for Eve & Eve double bottoms. They are 
the same as for other double bottoms. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to predict a target price. 
Having a target to aim at may allow you to get out near the peak. If price 
nears the target, evaluate the situation. Will price continue moving higher, or 
is there a larger likelihood of a drop? 

‘To find the price target, compute the height of the pattern by subtracting 
the lowest low in the bottom from the highest high between the two bottoms. 
Add the result to the highest high to get the price target. 

For example, Figure 29.6 shows an Eve & Eve double bottom. The low- 
est low in the pattern is the left bottom at 14.27. The highest high is 18.39 (the 
breakout or confirmation price). Add the difference, 4.12, to the highest high 
to get a target of 22.51. In this example, price rose to only 20 before dropping. 

You can use Table 29.3 to check the probability of your stock reaching the 
target. In this example, a move of 4.12 from the launch point of 18.39 means a 
22% rise. If we ignore that the double bottom shown occurs in a bear market, 
Table 29.3 says that 39% of Eve & Eve double bottoms will fail to see price rise 
more than 20%. It’s probably more like 41% will fail to see a 22% rise. It also 
means 59% or so will succeed. The trade has a lot of risk, and it’s up to you to 
decide whether to take that risk. 


Table 29.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Compute the pattern height from the highest high between the two 


bottoms to the lowest bottom low. Add the difference to the high- 
est high. The result is the target price. The bottom portion of the 
table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Wait for breakout Wait for a close above the confirmation point before buying. 


Trade with For best results, buy in a bull market. 
market trend 


Check others in To avoid 5% failures, check other stocks in the same industry and buy 


the industry if they are showing bottoming patterns or if their stocks are rising. 
Stop location Use Table 29.7 to help determine stock location. 
Description Bull Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 85% 
Percentage reaching full height target 66% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 46% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 33% 


452 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


The bottom portion of the table shows how often price will reach the 
target. Using the full height, as in our example, price will reach the target 66% 
of the time. Use half the height or three times the height and the likelihood of 
success changes, as the table shows. 

Wait for breakout. Even in bull markets, trying to anticipate a bot- 
tom by buying a stock simply because it seems “cheap” is not a good strategy. 
‘Tomorrow, the price may be cheaper. By next week, the company could declare 
bankruptcy. 

With double bottoms, waiting for price to close above the confirmation 
price is a good way to trade. You can still lose money, but that is the way to bet. 

Trade with market trend. Let the smart money trade against the pre- 
vailing trend. You should follow in their footsteps only after they have cleared 
a path through the landmines. In other words, trade with the general market 
trend. Buy bullish chart patterns (like double bottoms) in a rising stock market. 
Avoid going long in bear markets. 

Check others in the industry. If other stocks in the same industry are 
doing well, then that bolsters the case that your double bottom will break out 
upward, reversing the downward price trend. If other stocks in the same indus- 
try are showing bullish bottoming patterns or if their stock price is rising, then 
trade the double bottom. 

If price in other stocks is breaking down, making lower lows, then look 
elsewhere for a more promising situation. Double bottoms are plentiful. Keep 
searching. 

Stop location. Table 29.7 can help with stop placement. Be sure to con- 
vert the potential loss as a function of the current price into a percentage. Try 
not to gasp if the result is big. You’ll wake the baby. 

Table 29.11 shows special performance features of double bottoms. 

Bottom-to-bottom variation. Do double bottoms with small price vari- 
ations in their bottom lows perform better than do those with large variations? 
No. Large variations see better performance than small ones. 


Table 29.11 
Special Features 
Trading Tactic Performance 
Small bottom-to-bottom variation 47% 
Large variation 53% 
Median bottom-to-bottom variation 1% 
Lower left bottom 51% 


Lower right bottom 49% 


Experience 453 


To get this result, I computed the price difference between the bottoms of 
each double bottom and then found the median of all patterns studied. Those 
with bottom-to-bottom price differences higher than the median were termed 
large; lower than the median were termed small. 

Lower bottom. When the left bottom was below the right bottom, per- 
formance improved after the breakout. The performance difference is mar- 
ginal, though, just two percentage points. Still, an edge is an edge. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Guess Inc. 


In the spring of 2003, Guess Inc. (GES) started making a run for the moon. 
It climbed from a low of 1.65 to 9.79. That was a warning that the stock would 
move sideways to rest for a spell. Because the stock rose by almost six times, 
the likely horizontal move would last for months. 


¢ Lesson: If a stock makes a significant climb, expect a sideways move of 
extended duration, proportional to the height of the rise. 


I don’t think I knew that then, and if I did, ignored it. The stock formed 
an Eve & Eve double bottom in the rarified atmosphere near 7. The stock 
confirmed the double bottom at 8, and I was there with cash in hand, ready to 
give it to the smart money. 

From my notebook: “18 June 2004. Filled at: 8.065 [adjusted for split]. 
Stop: 7.29 for a [potential] loss of 10%. This is below the minor low on 4 
May 2004. Upside target: 9.92 for a 23% rise. I expect price to stall near old 
high, say 9.25. 

“Mood (will trade work? Bought too soon?): Excited but cautious. I don’t 
expect this to work out well. I think the market is about to tumble. Buy reason: 
EEDB [Eve & Eve double bottom]. The apparel market seems to be doing 
well. In the last few days, the stocks have moved higher, strongly. Many are like 
this one: They’ve reached a yearly high, then backtracked and are struggling to 
recover. The bad news is that it has a PE [price-to-earnings ratio] of 50. Ouch. 
I have my doubts about this one working, but if the market continues to climb, 
this might do well, too.” 

I placed the stop with my broker and watched as the stock threw back to 
the breakout and continued lower. It hit my stop and filled at 7.28. 

A day after I sold, the stock bottomed and completed a triple bottom, 
which later confirmed as valid. However, the stock only climbed as high as 9.17 


454 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


(8.5% above confirmation of the triple top) before dropping below 6. So it 
wasn’t a big gainer, either. 

I made a perfect entry but either sold too soon (I could have let price 
climb up to confirm the triple bottom) or sold too late (during the double bot- 
tom throwback). I lost 10% on the trade. 

I think the real key to this trade was the lesson stated earlier, that of know- 
ing price was going to rest after a strong uptrend (which it did, for about a year). 


CH Energy 


I was sorry to see CH Energy (CHG) stock stop trading when it was taken over 
by another company. I liked the dividends the electric utility paid and capital 
appreciation sweetened the deal. 

This is one of those trades where you don’t try to do what I did unless 
you’re an experienced trader. On 3 June 2010, “I bought because this has 
bounced off what I consider a forming double bottom low, yielding 5.7%, 
and I have lots of cash that’s just sitting there earning zip. I bought it for 
the yield.” 

If you look at the chart, you’d see the Eve & Eve double bottom clearly 
on the chart, bottoming after the 2007-2009 bear market. I bought as the sec- 
ond bottom was forming, so I got in well before confirmation. 


¢ Lesson: Don’t try this at home. Often waiting for confirmation is the 
correct approach. 


After I bought, the stock climbed. It looked like a rising staircase with no 
huge plunges to frighten the children. 

On 5 April 2011, I placed a limit order to sell at 52 and it filled. Appar- 
ently, 52 was my target. From my notebook: “Sell reason: Hit target. Since the 
stock is moving up, I decided to sell only half my position.” 

On the trade, I made 35%, including those tasty dividends. Even better, 
the stock peaked the next day and dropped down to 48 and change about a 
week later. I love it when the stock later shows I was right to sell. However, in 
this case, the decline was short-lived. It move sideways in the mid-50s for the 
rest of the year and then jumped to the mid-60s during the takeover. 


Cypress Semiconductor 


The trade in Cypress Semiconductor (CY) I would call a mistake and that’s 
good because it gives me something to write about. 

The stock started trending higher from the September 2004 low and 
formed an Eve & Eve double bottom along the way. This double bottom acted 
not as a reversal pattern but as a continuation. They look weird because they 
don’t have a left side that towers above the pattern (I like to see the left side be 


Experience 455 


above the top of the peak between the two bottoms. In this case, the stock only 
made it about three-quarters of the way up). 

On 7 February 2005, I bought the stock, filled at 12.69. Here’s my note- 
book: “Stop: 11.05, just below the pennant in February. Upside target: 15.71. 
Future NASDAQ direction (guess): I expect the NASDAQ to stall at the knot of 
overhead resistance and turn down. That’s not good for the stock, but it shows 
strong upward momentum, and I’m hoping the flag will support the stock. 

“Buy reason: EEDB [Eve & Eve double bottom]. A strong breakout on 
Friday suggests an extended move, but I think the fundamentals are weak. 
This may throw back at 14 due to knot of resistance in June 2004. The 13-16 
range is going to be a problem for this stock (May to June consolidation 
region—a MMD [measured move down chart pattern] corrective phase). If the 
NASDAQ turns around (continues up), this stock might do well. I chose this 
over Intel because of the book score. Intel has a —4 score and an upward break- 
out from a descending triangle.” 


¢ Lesson: Never chase a stock. If you can’t get in at a good price, wait for 
a retrace or look elsewhere for a better trade. 


Confirmation of the double bottom was at 11.83, and I bought the stock 
at 12.69, or 7% above the optimum entry price. Now, I wouldn’t touch the 
stock until it behaved. 

Perhaps you heard me yelling for the exit three days later. I sold, and the 
order filled at 13.28. “Sell reason: Stock has made what looks like a tail. Time 
to sell before I give back more profit and the stock plunges.” 

If you are familiar with candle patterns, the stock made a gravestone doji 
or shooting star. In non-candle terms, it was a tail or spike. The stock made a 
tall upward move but ended the day near the bottom of the trading range, right 
where it began. Often tails, if followed by a lower high the next day, mean price 
has peaked and will head lower for a few days (or longer). The key is, you have 
to wait to see if the price bar stands alone like a single tree atop a hill. 

In this case, it didn’t. The tail was buried in a forest. The stock continued 
higher for about another 2 weeks. I made 4% in 3 days, which isn’t bad if I 
could annualize it (do that every 3 trading days for a year). 


¢ Lesson: If a technical pattern unfolds (the tail in this case), wait for it 
to complete before trading. 


If the stock had turned lower, then this would have been a terrific exit. 
Unfortunately, that didn’t happen. Also, tails that shoot lower are more reliable 
than those that shoot upward. 


¢ Lesson: Bullish tails (downward price spikes) work better than bearish 
ones (upward spikes). 


456 Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve 


Sample Trade 


Not all chart pattern trades work as expected, and Figure 29.6 shows an exam- 
ple. To be sure we are dealing with a valid Eve & Eve double bottom, let us run 
through the identification guidelines. 

Is the price trending downward to the pattern? Yes. Although the figure 
shows a high in mid-January (B), the stock peaked back in mid-November 
1999 (not shown). 

Do both bottoms resemble an Eve bottom? The shape appears rounded 
in both bottoms. The left bottom comprises two minor lows, but if you exclude 
the first minor low (shown as point A), the Eve assessment does not change. 

The rise between the bottoms is 29%, and the bottoms are 4% apart in 
price and 18 days distant (measured from lowest low to lowest low). This is one 
of the narrower Eve bottoms, but it is still fine. 

Volume is higher on the right bottom than the left in bear markets. This 
observation suggests slightly better performance (a rising price trend, from 
Table 29.6), but does not guarantee it. Price rises up to and closes above the 
confirmation price without first dropping below the right bottom low, so the 
breakout is upward. The pattern is a valid double bottom. 

What happened after the breakout? Price climbed enough to clear the 
confirmation line, then threw back and continued down. The stock reached a 
low of 4.24, recovered, and then dropped more, bottoming at 2.02 in February 
2003 (not shown, but owch/). 


Gateway Inc (Computers & Peripherals, NYSE, GTW) 


Mid] - 48 
| - 44 
|, Broker - 40 
| jj Downgrade 
hy - 33 
| - 30 


B Confirmation Line 


il | 
| - 22 
biting \ z 


hy ga 

fh! Myr | Woah aT 18 
Jn Why 2 

a eM in 7 


Eve Eve 


Gap 


L 4 
00 Dec Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 29.6 Price climbed just 9% after the breakout due to deteriorating 
fundamentals. 


Sample Trade 457 


If you bought at the breakout price and sold at the highest high, you 
would have made 9%, without deducting commissions or other trading costs. 
My guess is many traders would have lost money, perhaps a lot of it if they rode 
the stock down. 

What went wrong? Is this another case of overhead resistance? No. This 
is a case where the fundamentals take center stage. See that large gap on the 
left of the chart? Ten days before the gap, a brokerage downgraded the stock. 
The stock dropped, sure, but it hardly noticed the downgrade. 

On November 29, when the market was closed, the company announced 
that it would not meet its previous sales projections. When the stock opened 
the following day, price gapped lower (an exhaustion gap), closing 36% below 
the prior close. In short, the stock dead-cat bounced; the bounce phase was the 
rounding turn before the double bottom (point B). 

A brokerage firm rated the stock “outperform” on the day it gapped lower. 
Such positive statements after a large down gap help drive the price higher in 
the bounce phase. However, the dire situation eventually catches the hype and 
the stock sinks . .. sometimes dramatically, like that shown here. 

Thus, even though we had a valid Eve & Eve double bottom, the funda- 
mentals were screaming se//. I do not recommend taking a position in a stock 
showing a dead-cat bounce for at least 6 months, sometimes even up to a year. 
Many chart patterns during that time look promising but fail to perform as 
expected. This is one example. 


30 


Double Tops, 
Adam & Adam 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Two well-defined peaks, narrow, pointed, and separated in time but near 
the same price. 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish reversal 
Performance rank 19 out of 36 
Breakeven failure rate 25% 
Average drop 15% 
Volume trend Downward 
Pullbacks 64% 
Percentage meeting price 64% 
target 
See also Double Tops, Adam & Eve; Double Tops, Eve & 


Adam; Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


This is the first of four chapters covering the various combinations of Adam 
and Eve double tops. An Adam & Adam double top is a twin-peak chart pat- 
tern, but not just any two peaks will do. Adam peaks are narrow, inverted V’s, 
and sometimes have a long, one-day upward price spike. Volume is heavier on 
the left top than the right—usually. 


458 


Tour 459 


The Results Snapshot shows the performance results. The average decline 
measures 15%, placing the performance rank of 19 out of 36 (where 1 is best). 
That’s almost midway in the list. Pullbacks occur in about two of every three cases. 

The “Percentage meeting price target” uses the full height for the meas- 
ure rule computation. In the Trading Tactics section of this chapter, I give an 
example of how to use the rule. 


Tour 


Figure 30.1 shows an example of an Adam & Adam double top. Notice how the 
twin peaks look similar both in height and width. Price shoots up like a rocket 
in a one- or two-day spike and then returns to the launch pad. The width at the 
base of the top is comparatively narrow. The top is not rounded-looking like 
you see in Eve tops. In a way, each top looks like a hypodermic needle. 

The twin-peak pattern becomes a true double top when price closes 
below the confirmation line (or price). That qualification is important as an 
earlier study I did found that price continues rising 60% of the time without 
confirming the twin-peak pattern. Thus, always wait for confirmation unless 
you have valid reasons for trading earlier. 

Volume is usually higher on the left top than on the right. That is what 
you see here, but it’s hard to tell on the chart (I used linear regression for trend 
analysis so I didn’t have to guess). 


Teva Pharmaceutical Industries (Drug, NASDAQ, TEVA) 
Adam - 40 
1 = 39 


i / 2 
Mi Af A) My i | i | 


| 2 
| | | | | i) - 7 


ih 


' AY | 

| | | \ | i | | i ih - 29 

| i th it Confirmation Line , th he i 
ye eh W | My ia 
, - 25 
- 24 
- 23 
ee, - 22 
- 21 
00 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec _Jan01 Feb Mar Apr May = 


Figure 30.1 An Adam & Adam double top has twin peaks that look similar with 
narrow spikes. 


460 Double Tops, Adam & Adam 


Identification Guidelines 


Double tops are easy patterns to find, but there are guidelines that help. I dis- 
cuss them in a moment, but first, look at Figure 30.2. 

The twin Adam peaks look similar and that is key. If they look different, 
such as one wide and the other narrow, then you have an Eve & Adam or an 
Adam & Eve top. When they look the same, you have either an Adam & Adam 
or an Eve & Eve double top. The difference between an Adam top and an Eve 
top is their width and shape. 

Notice how Adam tops are narrow and pointed, looking like an 
inverted V? Look at the Eve top highlighted in February. See how it appears 
rounded and wide? 

The two Adam peaks confirm as a valid double top when price closes 
below the confirmation line. The confirmation line is the lowest low between 
the two peaks. Adam & Adam peaks A and B are not part of a double top because 
price does not confirm the pattern. Instead, price rises above the higher of the 
two peaks, invalidating the double top pattern. 

Figure 30.3 shows another example of an Adam & Adam double top and 
an Eve top (nota good one, mind you, but it’ll have to do). The Eve top is wide 
and composed of several short spikes—minor highs—and the group appears 
rounded. Adam tops are narrow, inverted V’s, usually composed of one- or 


Vulcan Materials (Cement & Aggregates, NYSE, VMC) 


- 52 
in Adam  § 


\ 


pee 


| - 47 
“ln |, f N , 


A yf Nad # 
, al h HK M 


lt My | | 
; Wy Lv, > 


| f i 


- 37 


N - 36 
- 35 


99 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 30.2 An Adam & Adam double top confirms when price closes below the 
confirmation line. Contrast Adam to the Eve pattern in February. 


Identification Guidelines 461 


Smith International (Oilfield Svcs/Equipment, NYSE, SII) 


| ih ! hai 
Eve wl My tnt 36 


(ulti yeh! =x 
i) ti! : 


tht 


| | 
Mn 7 
Wa atm gl - 
am | I | 
| ly | i ih \ il mee 


i, | \ il i _ 24 
igi 


Confirmation Line 222 


- 13 
01 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan02_ Feb Mar Apr May 
Figure 30.3. Another example of an Adam & Adam double top, but price does 
not decline far below the confirmation line. 


two-day price spikes. Price climbs into the Adam & Adam pattern, forms the 
two tops, and drops to the confirmation line, validating the double top. 

In this example, volume trends upward and that is unusual. Volume is 
also heavier on the right top if you bracket the peak with 5 days of average 
volume (2 days to the left to 2 days to the right). Volume is usually heavier on 
the left peak. 

Table 30.1 shows identification characteristics for double tops. Consider 
Figure 30.4 as we go through the table. 

Appearance. Look for price to climb into a twin-peak pattern. The peaks 
should top out near the same price. After the double top, price should drop and 
confirm the pattern as valid. 

Price trend. Price must trend upward leading to the pattern to qualify it 
as a top, not a bottom. The upward price trend can be short, though. 

Valley between tops. A dip should separate the two tops, making each 
top stand out as its own minor high. Do not select patterns that are part of 
the same congestion pattern. For this reason, the peaks marked A and B in the 
figure are not part of a double top. 

Top high price. The price difference between the two peaks is usually 
minimal (the median is 1%). The key is that the two peaks should appear to 
peak at or near the same price. The two Adam tops shown in Figure 30.4, for 
example, have a 4% price variation. 


462 Double Tops, Adam & Adam 


Table 30.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Adam tops are narrow price spikes, inverted V’s. Both should 


appear similar. 


Price trend Price trends upward leading to the pattern and should not form a 
third peak, nor should the twin peaks be part of the same consoli- 
dation pattern. Look for two distinct minor highs. 


Valley between tops Patterns with a large dip (a tall pattern) perform better than 


short ones. 
Top high price Top-to-top price variation is small. 
Top separation Tops should be at least a few weeks apart, but be flexible. 
Price decline Price must close below the confirmation price without first rising 
after right top above the pattern. 
Volume Usually higher on the left top but volume trends downward from 


peak to peak. 


Breakout direction, | Breaks out downward when price closes below the lowest valley 
confirmation between the two tops. A downward breakout confirms the dou- 
ble top as a valid chart pattern. 


Newport Corporation (Precision Instruments, NASDAQ, NEWP) 


Adam . 28 
Left “a Right _ 


Shoulder Shoulder - 26 


| h Ht H | - 24 
‘ itt sy : 
yw :: 


yl 
i ri Confirmation Line - 18 


| 
f by Ny ‘Wada: 
i (WW Ay : 


‘i - 


- 9 
01 Oct Nov Dec Jan 02 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 30.4 An Adam & Adam double top within a complex head-and-shoulders 
top. The double top acts as a dual head for the complex head-and-shoulders top. 


Focus on Failures 463 


Top separation. How far apart should the peaks be (in time)? Some ana- 
lysts argue that a month is the minimum, but I put no such limitation on the 
patterns I selected. However, be sure that the tops are distinct minor highs. 

Price decline after right top. The stock must decline to the confirma- 
tion price before you consider taking a position unless the situation warrants 
a quicker move. Sometimes, instead of confirming, the stock forms another 
peak, forming a triple top. If that happens, treat the pattern as a triple top. 

Volume. Volume is usually higher on the left peak than on the right. 
Linear regression on the volume from peak to peak says it trends lower from 
left to right. 

Breakout direction. A breakout occurs when price closes below the low- 
est valley between the two tops. The breakout is always down, or else you’re 
not looking at a valid double top. Wait for price to close below the confirma- 
tion line before trading a stock showing a double top. 


Focus on Failures 


Double tops have two types of failures. The first is one of identification. You 
must wait for price to close below the confirmation line. Only then does the 
twin-peak pattern become a true double top. You can try trading the pattern 
before price drops to the confirmation line, but if you are shorting a stock, you 
will probably take a loss when price soars away from you. Do the smart thing 
and wait for price to close below the low between the two peaks before trading. 

The second type of failure is what I call a 5% failure. That means price 
confirms the pattern and then drops no more than 5% below the breakout 
price before rebounding. It happens more often than I like to see, so be pre- 
pared and use a stop to limit the loss. 

Consider Figure 30.5, a double top that obeys the identification guide- 
lines, including closing below the confirmation level. The uphill run starts in 
May 1992 (not shown) and peaks in the first top during March 1993, repre- 
senting a rise of over 60%. Price retraces the gain for a month before gather- 
ing steam and trying for a new high. It succeeds at the beginning of June, when 
price crests the old high by 63 cents. 

However, the celebration is short and price tumbles. It drops over 20% 
before meeting support at 26. The new low is below the double top’s valley 
(between the two peaks), the so-called confirmation price, but the stock quickly 
turns upward. Price climbs at a smart pace and does not stop until it touches 39 
(not shown). That is a 50% bounce off the low. If you sold your shares when 
price closed below the confirmation level (thinking the stock would continue 
down), you would have walked away from a chunk of money (that is, holding 
onto the shares and seeing price rise 50%). 

The failure of price to drop more than 5% below the breakout is what I 
calla 5% failure. Price breaks out downward but fails to descend by more than 


464 Double Tops, Adam & Adam 


Phillips Van Heusen (Apparel, NYSE, PVH) 


First Top Second Top 
ir - 33 
iy" 

ae | q 

NH | i it I 
fag hy jah yr ~30 


baw -32 


| ae | 
Mh Confirmation Level | | —27 
| Ne 


Pullback _ 5 


6 
5 
i 24 
mah >, 

g Sep 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Au 


Figure 30.5 A double top pattern that suffers a 5% failure. Price fails to continue 
moving down by more than 5% before rebounding. 


5% before turning around. Unfortunately, 5% failures are plentiful for Adam 
& Adam double tops (ranking 21 out of 36 patterns, where 1 has the lowest 
failure rate). Speaking of numbers, let’s talk about them, shall we? 


Statistics 


Table 30.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I discovered 1,282 patterns in 656 stocks starting from 
July 1991 to March 2020. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some 
no longer trade. Because few patterns appeared in bear markets, I removed 
them from this edition. The number found reflects that change. 


Table 30.2 

General Statistics 
Description Down Breakout 
Number found 1,114 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 
Average decline -15% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -4% 
Days to ultimate low 51 


How many change trend? 28% 


Statistics 465 


Reversal/continuation performance. Since we are dealing with tops 
and the breakout is downward, all patterns act as reversals of the upward price 
trend by definition. 

Average decline. The average decline measures from the breakout to the 
ultimate low, which is the lowest low before price climbs more than 20% or 
closes above the highest peak in the double top. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Despite including only bull market 
samples and using the dates of the double top’s breakout to ultimate low, the 
S&P dropped 4%. That decline helped suck price lower. Think of a rising tide 
lifting all boats. No, that’s not right. A receding tide strands fish, so that doesn’t 
sound right, either. I’m sure you can figure out a suitable metaphor. 

Days to ultimate low. In other chapters, I found that price drops twice 
as fast as it rises. So this pattern reaches the ultimate low in about 7 weeks, 
covering an average drop of 15%. What that means is you can make more 
money shorting in a quicker period than going long and waiting for price to 
rise. Of course, it also means you can /ose money faster. 

How many change trend? For upward breakouts (from bullish pat- 
terns, like double bottoms), I like to see more than half of patterns clear a 20% 
rise. For downward breakouts (like you see from Adam & Adam double tops), 
I don’t have a good sense of what’s a decent number. 

If you’re going to short a stock showing a bearish chart pattern, then 
obviously you'll want to see a monster number on this item. It’s a tally of how 
many patterns see price drop more than 20%. 

Table 30.3 shows failure rates for double tops. The bull market starts 
out with a high failure rate (breakeven), and it almost doubles in the next row 
down. The losses are painful. Let me explain with examples. Twenty-five per- 
cent of Adam & Adam double tops fail to see price drop more than 5%. That’s 
a lot. The next row down shows that 46% will fail to see price drop more than 
10%. And so on down the list. If you are considering shorting this pattern, then 
maybe you should reconsider. 

Table 30.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction of choice is downward. 
How often? All of the time. That’s by definition. A breakout occurs when price 
closes below the lowest valley between the two Adam peaks. As the Identifica- 
tion Guidelines explained, if price doesn’t close below the confirmation price, 
then it’s not a double top. 

Yearly position, performance. The performance difference for bearish 
patterns doesn’t vary much depending on where in the yearly high—low price 
range the breakout appears. We see that in the table. It does indicate, however, 
that you should avoid shorting a stock within a third of the yearly high. Does 
that advice make sense? Consider that there’s a reason a stock is making new 
highs and another stock is making new lows. You want to short weak stocks 
(those making new lows for a reason), not those you believe are overvalued 
and ripe to tumble. A rising price trend can continue longer than you expect, 
sometimes for years. 


466 Double Tops, Adam & Adam 


Table 30.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Maximum Price Decline (%) 


Down Breakout 


5 (breakeven) 
10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

50 

75 

Over 75 


Table 30.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


275 or 25% 
237 or 46% 
171 or 61% 
123 or 72% 
84 or 80% 
74 or 87% 
55 or 91% 
62 or 97% 
31 or 100% 
2 or 100% 


Down Breakout 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


Pullbacks occurrence 

Average time to pullback peaks 

Average time to pullback ends 

Average decline for patterns with pullbacks 
Average decline for patterns without pullbacks 


Percentage price resumes trend 


Performance with breakout day gap 
Performance without breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


Pullbacks. A pullback happens almost two-thirds of the time. That’s 
about the rate we see for both throwbacks and pullbacks, oddly enough, and 
that’s reassuring (only pullbacks apply to double tops, so don’t let me confuse 


the issue with facts). 


It does not take long for the stock to return to the breakout price—11 
days on average. When a pullback does occur, it hurts performance, as the table 
shows. I think that’s because the upward curl of a pullback robs downward 
momentum, eventually hurting overall performance. Don’t quote me on that 


because it’s only a guess. 


100% down 
L-16%, M -16%, 
H-14% 


64% 
-6% in 6 days 
11 days 
-14% 
-18% 

54% 


-16% 
-15% 
$1.40 


Statistics 467 


After a pullback completes, price continues to drop 54% of the time. 

Gaps. A breakout day gap does give better performance, on average, but 
not so you’d notice. However, the gap size is painful compared to some other 
bearish chart patterns with gaps. 

Table 30.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. ‘Tall patterns perform better than short ones, and the difference 
for a bearish pattern is surprisingly wide. And that’s coming from an author 
who abhors adverbs. 

I determined height from the highest peak in the pattern to the lowest 
valley between the two peaks. I divided the height by the price of the low- 
est valley. The results, for all Adam & Adam double tops measured this way, 
I show as the median in the table. A value above the median means the double 
top is tall. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than do narrow ones, but the per- 
formance difference isn’t big. I used the median width as the separator between 
narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. The table shows the performance 
results when combining the height and width traits. Patterns that are both tall 
and narrow perform best by seeing price decline most after the breakout. The 
table also shows that you should avoid short double tops. 

Table 30.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression to determine the volume trend. 
I found it recedes as measured from the left peak to the right one. However, 
that’s only true 59% of the time, so allow variations. Do not discard a pattern 
because it has an unusual volume trend. 


Table 30.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance -18% 
Short pattern performance -13% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 7.1% 
Narrow pattern performance -14% 
Wide pattern performance -16% 
Median width 15 days 
Short and narrow performance -13% 
Short and wide performance -13% 
Tall and wide performance -17% 


Tall and narrow performance -18% 


468 Double Tops, Adam & Adam 


Rising/Falling volume. Double tops with rising volume performed 
slightly better than did those with falling bottoms, but not so you’d want to 
stand on the rooftops and yell, “Eureka!” 

Breakout day volume. Many traders will swear that heavy breakout vol- 
ume adds to the reliability of a pattern. Some technicians demand it. But have 
they proved it? 

The table shows what I found, and it’s a yawn. Heavy breakout volume 
does help, but only by two percentage points and that’s if you trade it perfectly 
and often enough (over a thousand times). 

Table 30.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the 
pattern in half but used anesthetic. I found, for example, that a stop placed 
at the top of the pattern triggered 3% of the time. However, if you were 
shorting the stock, the stop might be too far away to be tolerable. Perhaps 
you'd like something closer. If so, the table shows the hit rate for two other 
locations. 

Table 30.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 1990s showed the best performance, with 
the other two decades tied for second place. 

Failures over time. This is what I like to see, numbers that show a trend. 
In this case, the failure rates have increased from a low during the 1990s to 
almost double that in the past decade (the 2010s). Oops. That’s not really good 
news for chart patterns, is it? 

Table 30.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Almost half of downward breakouts will bust. 
That’s huge! 


Table 30.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Down Breakout 
Volume trend 59% down 
Rising volume trend performance -16% 
Falling volume trend performance -15% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -16% 
Light breakout volume performance -14% 

Table 30.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Down Breakout 
Pattern top 3% 
Middle 16% 


Pattern bottom 66% 


Trading Tactics 469 


Table 30.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Down Breakout 
1990s -17% 
2000s -14% 
2010s -14% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 16% 
2000s 21% 
2010s 27% 
Table 30.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 488 or 44% 
Single bust count 268 or 55% 
Double bust count 24 or 5% 
Triple+ bust count 196 or 40% 
Performance for all busted patterns 22% 
Single busted performance 37% 
Non-busted performance (Adam & Adam double bottom) 39% 


Busted occurrence. I sorted the patterns by how many busts they showed. 
Single busts came in first place, but triple (or more) busts came in second. That 
may sound odd, and it is, but other chart patterns show a similar trend. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used Adam & Adam double 
bottoms as the proxy for a non-busted double top (that is, one with an upward 
breakout—there’s no such a thing, hence the substitute). This instance is one 
of the few cases where the non-busted double bottom beats all combinations 
(single, double, and triple+) and single busted patterns. It suggests that you’d 
do better trading bullish chart patterns, not bearish busted ones. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 30.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to predict a target price. 
To use this, subtract the lowest low between the two highs from the highest 
peak in the pattern and then subtract the result from the breakout price (the 
lowest low between the two peaks). The result is the target price. 


470 Double Tops, Adam & Adam 


Table 30.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Compute the pattern height from the lowest low between the two 


tops to the highest peak. Subtract the height from the lowest low. 
The result is the target price. The target must be above zero and 
represent a reasonable decline. Use Table 30.3 as a check. The bot- 
tom portion of this table shows how often the measure rule works. 
Wait for breakout Wait for a close below the confirmation price before selling. 
Trade with For best results, short in a bear market. 
market trend 


Check others in To avoid 5% failures, check other stocks in the same industry and 


the industry trade if they are showing topping patterns or if their stocks 
are falling. 

Stop location Consult Table 30.7 for guidance on stop placement. 

Description Down Breakout 

Percentage reaching half height target 83% 

Percentage reaching full height target 64% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 37% 

Percentage reaching 3x height 23% 


For example, in Figure 30.7, the highest high is the left peak at 35. The 
lowest low is at 24.88. That gives a height of 10.12. Subtract the height from 
the lowest low to get a target of 14.76. If the result is negative, then ignore it; 
price cannot decline below zero. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often the measure rule 
works. For our full height example, we see price will reach the target 64% of 
the time. Cut the height in half or use another height, and the probability of 
success changes. 

Consider changing the predicted decline into a percentage, then looking 
up the failure rate in Table 30.3. In this example, the decline from a break- 
out of 24.88 represents a loss of 40%. Does that sound reasonable? (Correct 
answer: No). 

Table 30.3 shows that 91% of double tops will fail to drop more than 
35% (which is short of the 40% target, of course, but it’s closest in the table). 
Thus, the target price is too far away, and you should choose a more conserva- 
tive (closer) one. 

Wait for breakout. Usually, it is best to wait for the breakout (when 
price closes below the confirmation line) before trading this pattern. If you do 
not wait, chances are price will rise 60% of the time (in bull markets) instead 
of dropping below the confirmation line. The Sample Trade shows an example 
of how to ignore this rule and make more money. 


Trading Tactics 471 


Trade with market trend. Trade with the market trend for the best 
results. Since this is a bearish pattern, you will have more success shorting 
a stock if the general market is also trending down. It need not be in a bear 
market, because price can rise in a bear market, too. Just be sure price has been 
trending down (I use 1-, 2-, and 6-month trends in my checks). 

Check others in the industry. Other stocks in the same industry can 
give a vital clue to performance of the stock you want to trade. If other stocks 
are going down or showing signs of topping, then consider a short sale or sell- 
ing a long holding. 

Look for a stock that turns down first followed by the others. For exam- 
ple, Lowes reports earnings a few days before Home Depot (but this could 
have changed. I haven’t checked in years). When Lowes reported soft earnings, 
that also hurt Home Depot stock. Home Depot dropped even more when it 
reported the same problems (soft lumber prices) and weak results. Look for 
which stock turns down first, and see what happened the last time they all 
dipped (perhaps during the same month in prior years: Seasonality). 

Stop location. Table 30.7 can help you determine where to place a stop 
to avoid it being hit while still doing its job to protect your assets. Be sure to 
change the potential loss into a percentage of the current price to see if the loss 
is reasonable. If it’s not (a stop placed 8% away is common), then select a dif- 
ferent location. Don’t put it so close that you are guaranteed of being stopped 
out. A volatility stop can help you decide (see the Glossary). 

One person emailed me saying he used a stop that was like 1% away. 
He was being stopped out for small losses continually. No kidding! He wasn’t 
able to tolerate a larger loss. Don’t fall into that trap. Be sensible with stop 
placement. 

Table 30.11 shows special features of the Adam & Adam double top. 

Top-to-top variation. Does the price variation between tops sug- 
gest better performance after the breakout? Yes! If there’s a large varia- 
tion (more than the median 1%), then performance improves in the double 
tops I looked at. And the performance differences are wide enough to pay 
attention to. 


Table 30.11 
Special Features 
Trading Tactic Performance 
Small top-to-top variation 13% 
Large variation 17% 
Median top-to-top variation 1% 
Lower left top 15% 


Lower right top 16% 


472 Double Tops, Adam & Adam 


Lower top. This measure is a letdown. The performance difference 
between which top is lower doesn’t make a big performance splash: Just one 
percentage point. Yawn. A lower right top showing better performance makes 
sense to me. Why? It tells me the situation is especially weak, that price can’t 
even make it up to the old high. 


Experience 


Maybe I was trying to be cute and pretended I could pull a rabbit out of a 
hat with this trade in Phillips Petroleum (now called ConocoPhillips, COP). 
Figure 30.6 shows the damage I caused. 

The stock made a strong push up to the Adam & Adam double top at AB. 
The stock confirmed the pattern as valid when it closed below C. That hap- 
pened at D. 

Price behaved itself and slid down to E in a nice strong push before pull- 
ing back to F However, at G, I bought the stock and helped push it higher. 
Here’s my notes for the entry: “16 April 2002. I bought at market, filled at 
29.92 [adjusted for stock split]. The book score for the double top is —9, sug- 
gesting a weak formation that won’t decline more than 12% (the median for 
AADTs [Adam & Adam double tops]). 

“A 12% decline would put the low at 26.74. That could happen as earnings 
are due out shortly and are expected to be weak. However, it’s already been pre- 
announced, and I believe the stock will recover and return to old highs. I think 
the worst in refining margins are here now or are already behind us. Also, the 
ODR (one-day reversal) on 12 April 2002 (E), as far as it appears on my screen, 


ConocoPhillips (COP) 
A 8B ~32 


if rh i 7) es 
Ali ; | dal , 2 
i FY \ 


) 2 af Fh m M i 4 | -29 
, i( dy _" | Nyt / - 28 


01 Dec Jan 02 Feb 99 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 30.6 The predicted drop from a double top didn’t turn into a buy signal. 


Sample Trade 473 


suggests a rebounding stock price as in the February 2002 decline (J). This stock 
pays a dividend, too, 2.4% at current prices, money markets are at 1.0% now.” 
The book score I’m referring to is from my book, Trading Classic Chart 
Patterns (Wiley, 2002), and it introduced a scoring system for chart patterns. 
Price moved horizontally for a time, creating a rectangle top pattern at F 
(the two horizontal trendlines). 


¢ Lesson: Sell if a chart pattern breaks out downward, especially if the 
technical and fundamental reasons support a sale. 


The rectangle was the perfect exit for this trade and would have saved me 
money. The correct sell location was I, the day after the downward breakout. 

On 3 June (the price bar to the left of J), I wrote more in my notebook: 
“Support zone at 30 has now been busted through and stock is declining. 
I don’t think it'll hit the median decline for an AADT of 12.4%, to 26.74. 
I could sell now with a 3% loss. Support is difficult to see in this chart. SAR 
form thingy [support and resistance page in one of my computer programs] 
shows best support at 27.50. If the stock closes below 26.50, then sell it (a 10% 
loss). Otherwise, collect the dividend.” 

The notebook entry confirms that I knew about the stock breaking 
through support, but thought of round number 30 as support). 

On 15 July (H), I threw in the towel and sold the stock. “This stock has 
tumbled along with the market below the stop price, so I sold, filled at 25.81, 
well below the mental stop price of 26.50. Ouch. The refining industry is in the 
dumps and the market is taking everything down. Even its dividend couldn’t 
support it.” 

A mental stop is one kept in your head. In situations like a day trade 
where you need to get in and out fast, mental stops are invaluable. In cases like 
this trade, not having it in place can mean selling below the exit target. 


¢ Lesson: Use a hard stop (a stop-loss order placed with your broker) 
instead of a mental stop unless speed is needed. 


The lessons in this trade cost me 14%. 

Notice the October low at K. That was the bottom for the stock. From 
there, it climbed all the way up to 95.96, a gain of 436%. I had the right idea 
about this trade, but my timing was off by about 6 months. 


Sample Trade 


Since I trade from the long side, let me give you an example of how to use a 
double top defensively. Say you own the stock in Figure 30.7. How do you 
trade this one? Do you hold on like an amateur investor, or do you dump at the 
first sign of weakness, like a swing trader? 


474 Double Tops, Adam & Adam 


Noble Energy Inc. (Petroleum (Producing), NYSE, NBL) 


Adam = 
Adam - 35 


I Sell ~ 33 
4 Trend Li 
Hin Nv 4, Trend Line _ 


Sell 
Trend Line 
i 


h 


wil | 


Mal \ 
\ [i 


Confirmation Line | | - 24 
! 


Sold 


99 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 30.7 The two sell trendlines provide an opportunity to sell the stock at a 
price higher than the confirmation line. 


The answer depends on several factors, such as taxes, industry, and mar- 
ket outlook. Sometimes it may be wise to ride out the decline. 

Say you bought the stock at the February low, 19.25. At the first Adam 
top (35), you made 82%—nearly a double. Watching the stock drop to the 
confirmation line must have been painful. That drop took price down to 24.88, 
a decline that reduced your profit to just 29%. 

Look what would have happened if you sold the stock the day after price 
closed below the sell trendline: That would have gotten you out at 29.94 for a 
profit of 56%. 

I recently sold a utility stock because it shot up like the rise to point A. 
Since a quick decline often follows a quick rise, I was willing to sell my stock 
for a $7,000 profit plus over $1,300 in dividends because I did not want to give 
back thousands. I will miss the 5.3% yield at a time when money market funds 
are paying just 0.3%. The stock has declined since I sold it. 

Points A and B are called spikes or tails. Point A is especially good because 
the price closes near the daily low. That is important. Look for a long price 
spike with a close near the daily low. For the first Adam peak, if you sold the 
day after the spike, you would have made 62%. If you sold at the close the day 
after points B and A, you would have made 55% and 40%, respectively. Those 
are good gains regardless of how you slice it. 

Most amateur investors may have held onto the stock and rode it back 
down. As it bottomed at the confirmation line, they may have sold (some did 
as the slight rise in volume suggests). Others held on, vowing to sell if price 


Sample Trade 475 


reached the old high. When price climbed and approached the old high, their 
tune changed. Their desire to sell melted into greed. “Why sell if the stock is 
going up?” 

Good point. But you have to sell sometime. Price fluctuations may shake 
amateurs out or they may turn stubborn and hold on, this time riding the stock 
down to the confirmation point. That is when the twin peaks turn into a valid 
double top. That is also the time to sell. Placing a stop-loss order at the con- 
firmation line means your position sells without your having to worry about it. 

In this example, a second sell trendline would work well when price 
closed below it in September. If you sold at the close the following day, you 
would have made 50%. That is much better than the 29% gain when selling at 
the confirmation line. 

Am I advocating selling before confirmation? No. Every time I have done 
that in a double top, the stock never confirmed, and I gave up profit because 
price made new highs. Still, you can increase your profit by taking shortcuts 
to selling as the example shows (using trendlines, for instance). You can always 
buy back in if price does not sink to the confirmation price. 

The choice is yours. If you are just days away from changing a short-term 
gain into a long-term one, it may be wise to hold off selling. I did something 
similar by waiting 3 days to push a trade into a new tax year, shifting income. 
By delaying, I changed a 40% profit into a 27% one. Oops. 


31 


Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: ‘Two well-defined peaks, the first narrow and pointed, the second wide 
and rounded; both separated in time but topping near the same price. 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish reversal 

Performance rank 10 out of 36 

Breakeven failure rate 21% 

Average drop 16% 

Volume trend Downward 

Pullbacks 64% 

Percentage meeting price target 54% 

See also Double tops, Adam & Adam; double tops, 


Eve & Adam; double tops, Eve & Eve 


Adam & Eve double tops perform better than average based on the perfor- 
mance rank of 10 where 1 is best. The double-digit breakeven failure rate has 
a rank of 13 (out of 36, not shown in the Results Snapshot), so it’s good, too. 
If you own the stock in a bull market and it double tops, you might want to 
sell or not, depending on the circumstances. Sometimes it may pay to weather 
a small decline after a double top, especially if the general market and others 
in the industry are soaring. 


476 


Tour 477 


Tour 


Along with the head-and-shoulders pattern, double tops are perhaps the most 
popular. Many novice investors see a dual peak on the stock chart and pro- 
claim it to be a double top. However, there are a number of characteristics that 
compose a true double top, and I will discuss them in a moment, but first, what 
does an Adam & Eve double top look like? 

Consider Figure 31.1, a double top in ElkCorp. The first thing one 
notices is the twin peaks. They should top out near the same price and be 
widely spaced. The price trend leading to the first peak is upward, and price 
falls away after the second peak. Thus, the double top is a topping pattern and 
not a bottom. 

The intervening valley is just that: a valley that sees price decline by vary- 
ing amounts (a median of 10%. I measured this). The valley floor forms the 
confirmation line or price. A twin-peak formation becomes a true double top 
once price closes below the confirmation price, signaling a downward breakout. 

Sometimes a pullback occurs such as that shown in the figure. A pullback 
allows investors another opportunity to exit their position before the decline 
resumes (but not in this example, of course, because price climbed). For more 
aggressive traders, the pullback is a chance to make a short sale in the hope that 
price will continue falling. 


ElkCorp (Building Materials, NYSE, ELK) 
- 21 


, | - 20 
' Adam sie i I- 19 
| ATA | My a 
Ml | | hh 4 my r, 
ha . | \ ; ! | Pullback | il ae 

pA the be, 
| | ly | I | - 15 

' ss | | | | i Confirmation Line i ils 
| M, I phi uy =e 
| | - 13 
\ | - 12 
li 

eee ane ee 
00 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun a 


Figure 31.1 A double top has twin peaks that are usually a few months apart but 
quite near in price. Only when price declines below the valley floor is a double top 
confirmed as a valid chart pattern. 


478 Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 31.1 lists identification characteristics that Adam & Eve double tops 
share. They are only guidelines—not rules—and exceptions are many. Con- 
sider the double top shown in Figure 31.2 as I run through the guidelines. 

Appearance. When searching for an Adam & Eve double top, remem- 
ber that the Adam peak should look different from Eve. Adam looks like an 
inverted V, usually with a one- or two-day price spike poking out of the top. 
Eve tops are rounder and wider looking. Adam peaks come first; Eve, second 
in this chart pattern. 

Price trend. This Adam & Eve double top forms after a short-term price 
rise beginning in November. The average rise leading to a double top is 98 
days, or about 3 months, long. 

Valley between tops. I set no minimum price decline between the two 
tops, just to see if deep dips showed better performance than shallow ones. 
They do. The median dip is 10%, so allow variations. Figure 31.2 shows a 10% 
valley decline. 

Top high price. The price variation between the two tops is usually 
small, and some limit it to 3%. I placed no such limitations on the double tops 
I picked for testing, but they looked as if they peaked near the same price (the 
median variation is 1%). 

Top separation. Some will tell you that tops must be at least a month 
apart. Again, I placed no such restriction on the patterns I selected. However, 


Table 31.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance A two-peak Adam & Eve pattern with peaks topping out near the 
same price. Price rises to the first peak and declines after the 
second one. 
Price trend Price trends upward leading to the pattern and should not form 


a third peak, nor should the twin peaks be part of the same 
consolidation pattern. Look for two distinct minor highs. 


Valley between tops Patterns with a large dip perform better than short ones (median 


dip is 10%). 
Top high price Top-to-top price variation is small. The median is 1%. 
Top separation Tops should be at least a few weeks apart, but allow variations. 
The median width is 23 days. 
Price decline Price must close below the confirmation price without first rising 
after right top above the right top high. 
Volume Usually higher on the left top. 


Breakout direction, | Breakout is downward when price closes below the lowest val- 
confirmation ley between the two peaks. A downward breakout confirms the 
pattern as a valid double top. 


Identification Guidelines 479 


ExxonMobil Corp (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, XOM) 
- 45 


- 44 


uh m A. : 
i ‘ i | Mi Wi 
hui ey, yy A uy" I: 
co 
Mi " 3 


Figure 31.2 An Adam & Eve pattern forms in December and sends price back to 
the November low. 


the median distance was about 3 weeks as measured between the highest high 
on each peak. The double top in Figure 31.2 shows peaks 46 days apart. 

Price decline after right top. This guideline separates double tops from 
triple tops. If a third peak forms before confirmation, then ignore the double 
top and check if it is a triple top. If it is a triple top, then do not trade it as a 
double top. Common sense, really. 

Volume. Volume is usually higher on the left top than on the right as 
measured by the 5 days surrounding the peak (2 days before to 2 days after). If 
the right peak has higher volume, do not worry. It happens. The double top in 
the figure has higher volume on the left peak. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is always downward in 
confirmed (valid) double tops. A twin-peak pattern becomes a true double top 
when price closes below the confirmation or breakout price (they are the same). 

When confirmation occurs, it might be time to sell a long holding or ini- 
tiate a short sale. Trading before confirmation may mean price continues rising 
after the sale. A study I performed said that happens 60% of the time in bull 
markets. So trading before confirmation may lead to a loss 60% of the time. 

Why do double tops form? Consider Figure 31.3, an example of a well- 
shaped double top that satisfies all of the identification guidelines. Volume was 
unremarkable but did have its moments. On spurts, like that shown during 
March and again in April, volume spiked upward and buying demand pro- 
pelled the stock higher. 


480 Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


USF & G Corp (Insurance (Prop./Casualty), NYSE, FG) 


Adam Eve —20 
My -19 

| ‘thy I i ” i {{"" Il 
I iW ill 
iyi | . | | -17 
\ | im nh f Ig I 


Confirmation Level —16 


in 


Lal | il 
| 


‘ny, f | Measured Move 


| 
7 | “Wh (My i Up Formation Ll Mh -14 


-11 


-10 
Feb 93 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 31.3 Price does not push above this double top for over 3 years. A meas- 
ured move up pattern forms the rise to the left top. 


Unfortunate investors or traders bought near the Adam top hoping price 
would continue rising—a momentum play. However, astute technical inves- 
tors recognized the price pattern for what it really was: the completion of 
a measured move up. The first up-leg occurred in just three price bars, fol- 
lowed by horizontal movement for several weeks and another swift rise to 
the Adam top. 

With measured moves (and the main reason I treasure them), price often 
returns to the corrective phase (the horizontal movement midway up the pat- 
tern). So knowledgeable traders would have expected a drop from the Adam 
peak and that’s what happened. Price formed a base in early May that saw a low 
of 15.75. The consolidation lasted almost 2 months on light turnover. 

The price decline from peak to trough was not much in dollars, but it rep- 
resented a 20% drop. Comparatively few investors took advantage of the price 
lull to add to their position or place new trades. Novice traders who bought at 
the top probably swore they would sell just as soon as they got their money back. 

When price started rising again, traders pulled the trigger and sold their 
shares as soon as they got their money back. The volume pattern, which up to 
this point was flat, bumped up and took on a more rugged appearance (during 
late June and into July). Other traders, believing that the consolidation was 
over, bought for the first time. 

As price rounded over and formed the Eve peak during July, some inves- 
tors correctly assumed that a double top was forming. They sold their shares 
near the top, content with the profits they locked in. Other intrepid traders sold 
short and hoped price would fall. Price did fall but found support (in August) at 
the top of the horizontal price move located between the two double top peaks. 


Focus on Failures 481 


Giant Industries, Inc (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, Gl) 


‘- 


any 
i 


| a 4 
NC | | iy ' 
Confirmation h, 
Line 


| | i" fit 9 
i 5 ai | i . 


7 


| 
bub ue e 


01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 31.4 This Adam & Eve double top shows the difference between each 
peak’s width. 


After a prolonged attempt at creating a third peak in late August and into 
September, price gapped (continuation gap) below the confirmation point at 
15.75. Price broke out downward. The smart money sold their shares imme- 
diately and licked their wounds. Others hoped the selling was overdone while 
still others sold short. 

The stock attempted a pullback in mid-October but gave up. For the next 
several years, price failed to rise above the high established by the double top. 

Figure 31.4 shows another example of a double top. The Adam peak 
does not have a long, one-day price spike. Rather, the peak is narrow when 
compared to the Eve counterpart. Look at the width of each peak near the 
confirmation line, and you will see what I mean. If the top shape does not make 
it easy to identify the pattern, look at the base’s width—sometimes that helps. 
At the confirmation line, the Adam peak remains narrow but Eve remains wide. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 31.5 shows a typical failure of an Adam & Eve double top. Let’s run 
through the identification guidelines to see if we have correctly identified the 
chart pattern: 


Price trend: Price rises from the December low (H) to the Adam 
top. Check. 


482 Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


American Woodmark Corp (AMWD) 


tiv qe 10 

| Adam Eve iy if = =83 

th i atl tity c yh if = 89 
1th, oer esi ; vA =86 


18 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 31.5 Price after the breakout from this Adam & Eve pattern fails to 
drop far. 


Valley between tops: Price drops after Adam and turns up to reach the 
Eve peak. The dip from Adam (the higher of the two peaks) to confir- 
mation at E is 20%, which is plenty deep. 

Top high price: The price difference between the two peaks is minor: 
0.2%. The stock /ooks like it’s peaking near the same price. 

Top separation: The distance between the two peaks is 70 days, 
which is fine. 

Volume: Linear regression says volume is receding from peak to peak, 
that is, it’s higher on the left than on the right. I drew line D to show this. 

Breakout direction: It’s downward, as required. 

Confirmation: Price closes below confirmation line E a day after 
touching it. 


Every one of the above checks passes the guidelines set for the pattern. So what 
went wrong? 

Price broke out downward and made it to A. A pullback happened that 
returned price back to B (meeting the breakout price). A pullback is typical, 
and they happen 64% of the time. This one made the journey back in just 4 
days instead of the usual 12, and the stock didn’t drop far below the breakout, 
either (5.2%, which is close to the predicted average of 6% for a pullback). 

After price reached B, the breakout price, it kept rising up to C. At C, 
a right-angled broadening and descending pattern completed with a down- 
ward breakout. 

This sent price back down to approach the bottom (E or A) of the double 
top again. After that, the stock climbed and closed above the top of the pattern. 


Statistics 483 


When that happened, price busted the downward breakout. The drop from E 
(confirmation) to A was slightly above the maximum price of a 5% failure. So 
technically it wasn’t a failure, but I would have hated to have shorted this stock, 
or sold a long holding, expecting a steep decline. 

Acheck of the fundamentals shows that the company announced earnings 
at the Adam peak. You can see how the market reacted to that announcement 
(the stock dropped for a month). The large drop (F) that took the stock down 
to E, the confirmation line, was because of the next earnings announcement. 

The market interpreted as good news the next earnings announcement at 
G. The stock gapped higher (a breakaway gap) and soared thereafter. 

I didn’t see any news posted on the company website that explained why 
the stock turned higher at A. Apparently, the earnings report wasn’t as bad as 
shareholders thought or maybe optimism expressed about the future during 
the conference call (I’m speculating here because I didn’t check) helped con- 
vince people to buy the stock and halt the decline. 

I will say that in my trading, I usually ignore double tops. Why? Because 
the typical decline is meager. As I have aged, it makes more sense for me to 
invest in a diversified portfolio instead of doing lots of trading. I no longer 
need to day or swing trade when I can be riding my bicycle and making thou- 
sands. I will assess each situation. If it looks dire, where I would expect a huge 
loss, then I'll sell. 

In this figure, find point H in December. I consider this the launch price 
for the double top pattern. If I were looking at the stock the day after F (the 
breakout) and seeing the large drop after the earnings announcement, I’d be 
afraid the stock would continue lower, retracing most of its gains down to H 
(as a worst-case scenario). 


Statistics 


Table 31.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 784 Adam & Eve double tops in 533 stocks from 
July 1991 to February 2020. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some 
no longer trade. I consider this chart pattern rare. Of the four combinations 
of Adam and Eve double tops, this one has the fewest bull market samples. 
Because it’s rare, bear market samples are too few to show, so the number 
found is for bull markets only. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Since we are dealing with 
double tops and downward breakouts, all patterns act as reversals. That means 
price enters the bottom of the pattern going up and the breakout is downward, 
reversing that uptrend. 

Average decline. The average decline is slightly better than the other 
three combinations of Adam and Eve double tops. It’s even better than the 
15% average for all chart pattern types (not just Adam and Eve varieties). 


484 Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


Table 31.2 
General Statistics 
Description Down Breakout 
Number found 651 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 
Average decline -16% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 4% 
Days to ultimate low 53 
How many change trend? 30% 
Table 31.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 135 or 21% 
10 144 or 43% 
15 99 or 58% 
20 77 or 70% 
25 53 or 78% 
30 44 or 85% 
35 43 or 91% 
50 40 or 98% 
75 15 or 100% 
Over 75 1 or 100% 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Using the dates of the breakout to the 
ultimate low, we see that the S&P 500 dropped an average of 4%. Maybe that 
drop explains the slightly better performance for this pattern. The falling mar- 
ket helped drag down stocks. 

Days to ultimate low. It takes about 7 weeks from the breakout to reach 
the ultimate low, on average. The median is half that, though, or 27 days. That 
may assist you in the timing of the decline for your situation. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many patterns see 
price drop more than 20%. The higher the number, the better. Comparing the 
rank of the result shown in the table says that this double top is in the top third 
of the list: 11 out of 36. That’s quite good. 

Table 31.3 shows failure rates. One in five trades (21%) will see price 
fail to drop more than 5% after the breakout. That rate doubles to 43% for 
patterns failing to drop more than 10%. Is it any wonder that I no longer fear 
seeing a double top? 


Statistics 485 


Keep this table in mind if you decide to short a stock. The decline may be 
less than you think. If you own a stock, check this table for the likely decline. 
Is it worth holding onto the stock and weathering the decline? Only you can 
answer that. 

Table 31.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is downward. As you 
know, a breakout occurs when price closes below the lowest valley between the 
two tops. If price closes above the top of the pattern first, then you don’t have 
a valid double top. 

Yearly position, performance. Price drops farthest if the breakout is 
within a third of the yearly low. Avoid those with breakouts near the yearly 
high. Although that may sound strange, shorting a stock making new highs can 
be a disaster. You want to hunt down weak situations in stocks making new lows. 

Pullbacks. Pullbacks occur almost twice every three times. When they 
do occur, price takes 12 days to complete the journey back to the breakout 
price. However, a pullback hurts performance. 

For example, double tops with pullbacks declined 15%. Without pullbacks, 
price declined 17%. This finding suggests you should search for underlying 
support before investing. If you are considering shorting the stock and the 
decline stops in the support zone, would that warrant the risk of a trade? 

Price resumes the downward trend just over half the time. 

Gaps. The appearance of a breakout day gap suggests better perfor- 
mance, but not so you’d notice. 

Table 31.5 shows pattern size statistics. 


Table 31.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the 12-month low (L), L-17%, M-16%, 
middle (M), or high (H) H -15% 
Pullbacks occurrence 64% 
Average time to pullback peaks -6% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -15% 
Average decline for patterns without pullbacks -17% 
Percentage price resumes trend 55% 
Performance with breakout day gap -17% 
Performance without breakout day gap -16% 


Average gap size $0.74 


486 Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones after the breakout. 
To use this finding, compute the height of the double top from the tallest peak 
to the lowest valley between the two peaks. Divide the height by the price 
of the lowest valley between the two peaks. If the result is greater than the 
median shown in the table, then you have a tall pattern. 

Width. I didn’t see any performance difference between wide and narrow 
patterns, but I will say that wide patterns tend to perform better than narrow 
ones in many other chart pattern types. 

Height and width combinations. As one would expect, tall patterns 
outperform short ones regardless of whether they are wide or narrow. The 
numbers say to avoid short and wide patterns. 

Table 31.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. The volume trend from peak to peak is downward, which 
I found using linear regression. 


Table 31.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance -17% 
Short pattern performance -14% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 11.4% 
Narrow pattern performance -16% 
Wide pattern performance -16% 
Median width 23 days 
Short and narrow performance -15% 
Short and wide performance -14% 
Tall and wide performance -17% 
Tall and narrow performance -18% 
Table 31.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Down Breakout 
Volume trend 72% down 
Rising volume trend performance -15% 
Falling volume trend performance -16% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -16% 


Light breakout volume performance -16% 


Statistics 487 


Rising/Falling, breakout day volume. There’s not much performance 
difference if volume is rising or falling, or if the breakout day volume is 
heavy or light. 

Table 31.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I divided the 
double top in half and found how often price climbed on its way to the ulti- 
mate low. That may sound odd, but I wanted to know where to place a stop. 

Sticking it at the top of the pattern will see price trigger the stop 1% 
of the time, but the distance between your entry price and the stop location 
might be huge. So not only determine the best place for the stop, but check to 
be sure you can tolerate such a loss. 

Table 31.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 1990s showed the best performance, hand- 
ily beating the other two decades. So if you have a time-travel machine and can 
go back to the 1990s, you’ll know what to expect. 

Failures over time. Failures (5% failures) have grown steadily worse 
over the last three decades. It makes me wonder what the future will bring. 
Can I borrow your time machine to check? You’re probably telling me that 
there’s no future in time travel, but I digress. 

Table 31.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Almost half (40%) of double tops will bust. 
That’s painful if you are expecting a significant decline. 


Table 31.7 
How Often Stops Hit 

Description Down Breakout 
Pattern top 1% 
Middle 16% 
Pattern bottom 71% 

Table 31.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Down Breakout 
1990s -19% 
2000s -14% 
2010s -14% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 12% 
2000s 19% 


2010s 26% 


488 Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


Table 31.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 258 or 40% 
Single bust count 153 or 59% 
Double bust count 15 or 6% 
Triple+ bust count 90 or 35% 
Performance for all busted patterns 32% 
Single busted performance 52% 
Non-busted performance (Adam & Eve double bottoms) 43% 


Busted occurrence. Most of the double tops that bust do so only once. 
In second place is a triple bust (triple+: really three or more busts). 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared the performance of 
busted double tops with Adam & Eve double bottoms. Single busted tops beat 
the performance of double bottoms. “All busted patterns” means the perfor- 
mance combination of all busted types: single, double, and triple+ patterns. 

If you can find a busted double top, consider trading it, especially if you 
believe it'll single bust. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 31.10 shows trading tactics for double tops. They are similar to other 
double tops. 

Double tops serve three purposes. One is to get you out of a long holding. 
The second is to trigger a short sale. The third is to scare the daylights out of 
you. Before we get into a sample trade, let us review the basics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to help predict how far 
price may decline. Determine the pattern’s height and subtract it from the 
breakout price. The result is the target. 

For example, look at Figure 31.6. The highest high in the Adam & Eve 
double top is at 28.72, on the Eve top, and the lowest low (the confirmation 
line) is at 25.78. Subtract the difference (2.94) from the valley’s low (25.78) to 
get a target of 22.84. Price passed the target on the way down to C. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often price reaches targets 
based on various heights. The full height target, as used in the above example, 
reaches its target just over half the time. You may wish to cut the height in half 
to boost the success rate to 79%, but know you're also cutting potential profit 
(because the target will be closer). 

Once you know how far price might decline, you can check your work 
using Table 31.3. For example, the decline (above) of 2.94 in a stock trading 


Trading Tactic 


Trading Tactics 489 


Table 31.10 
Trading Tactics 


Explanation 


Measure rule 


Wait for breakout 


Trade with 
market trend 


Check others in 
the industry 


Stop location 


Compute the pattern’s height from tallest peak to valley low (between 
the two peaks). Subtract the height from the breakout price to get 
a target. Ignore values below 0. Big declines will be unrealistic. Use 
Table 31.3 for a reality check. The lower portion of the table shows 
how often the measure rule works. 


Wait for a close below the confirmation point before selling—usually. 
For best results, short in a bear market. 


To avoid 5% failures, check other stocks in the same industry and 
go short if they are showing topping patterns or if the stocks 
are falling. 


Consult Table 31.7 for help with locating a stop. 


Busted trade Trading a single busted double top can be rewarding. 


Tips See text. 

Description Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 79% 

Percentage reaching full height target 54% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 26% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 15% 


at 25.78 (the breakout price or use the current price) is 11%. Table 31.3 says 
that 43% of the stocks will fail to drop more than 10%. Will a 43 % failure rate 
persuade you to look elsewhere? 

Wait for breakout. As a trading signal, you will want to wait for the 
breakout before exiting a long position or opening a short sale. The breakout 
price is the lowest low between the two tops, shown in Figure 31.6 as the 
confirmation line. If you sell your shares before confirmation, there is a 60% 
chance that price will not decline to the confirmation line but will instead 
move higher (I conducted a study to determine this). Once price closes below 
the breakout price, sell your shares or consider shorting the stock. However, 
the decline after many double tops isn’t big, so I don’t recommend going short 
(or in many cases, selling a long holding). 

Trade with market trend. If you own shares in a bull market, look for 
underlying support and see if you can tolerate a loss to that level. With the bull 
market powering price upward, the downturn may be minor. In a bear market, 
that is the time to short a stock showing a double top. Trade with the market 
trend for best results. 

Check others in the industry. If other stocks in the same industry are 
showing weakness (moving down or forming bearish chart patterns), then 


490 Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


consider selling your stock. You might even want to sell before the breakout, 
but in a bull market, that may leave profits on the table when the price recovers 
before confirmation. In a bear market, it is a safer bet. Remember, you never 
go broke taking a profit. 

Stop location. Table 31.7 gives the probabilities of a stock reaching one 
of the stop locations as price seeks to find the ultimate low. Consult the table 
for guidance. 

Busted trade. In Table 31.9, I said that single busted Adam & Eve double 
tops outperformed the non-busted double bottom. Because a busted double 
top is easy to spot, you might consider going long after one appears. Look for 
overhead resistance and underlying support to help determine if the pattern 
will single bust (good luck with that). 

Tips. Let’s pretend that I enjoy shorting stocks. Here are some tips to 
make your life easier. In the first series of tips, look for a strong push upward 
leading to the Adam top, not a trend that meanders and rollercoasters for 
months before forming the double top. 

When I write of a knot, Figure 31.5 shows an example of what I’m blab- 
bering about. You'll see it at I, circled in the figure. Price moves sideways for 
at least 3 days with lots of price overlap. It’s in the line of trend leading up to 
the Adam peak, and it’s the closest support knot below confirmation. That’s the 
target. Price at A almost reaches that knot and reverses. 


¢ In your trade, look to the left of the Adam peak where price trends up 
to the double top. If the stock at confirmation is resting on a knot of 
support, then don’t take the trade. Expect the stock to bounce off that 
knot and maybe bust the downward breakout. It’s too high risk to short 
the stock. 

¢ Look for the first knot of support below confirmation. The top of that 
knot is your price target. Price will often drop to the top of that area 
right after a breakout and reverse there. It’s a good time and price to 
close out the trade. 

¢ If the knot of support is well down the price trend (such as when price 
makes a swift rise up to the double top), the stock likely won’t make it 
back down to the knot, at least not in the first few days. Measure the 
move from the knot to the confirmation price and divide by three or 
maybe half, then subtract the result from the confirmation price. That’s 
your target. 


Figure 31.4 shows an example of this strong move up to the Adam 
peak. There’s no support area (no place where price goes horizontal 
for 3 or more days) along that run, so slice the height of the run in half 
or thirds and measure down that far from the confirmation price as 
your target. 


Sample Trade 491 


Table 31.11 
Special Features 

Trading Tactic Performance 
Small top-to-top variation 15% 

Large variation 17% 

Median top-to-top variation 1% 

Lower left top 16% 

Lower right top 15% 


¢ Sometimes price will bottom in an irregular fashion (before the Adam 
peak), with several valleys touching an up-sloping trend. Connect 
those valleys with a trendline. That’s your target. This works with a 
loose-looking up-and-down movement that’s quite wavy but seems to 
bottom along the trendline. That trendline, extended into the future, is 
a support area where the stock will drop and reverse. This setup is rare, 
but I’ve seen price hit the trendline and reverse there. 


Table 31.11 shows special features of the double top. 

Top-to-top variation. Does the price difference between the highest 
high in each top indicate better performance after the breakout? Yes! Is it a big 
difference? No! 

I found that when the price difference between the two tops was greater 
than the median, performance improved but only slightly as the table shows. 

Lower top. If the left top is lower than the right, performance improves 
but only marginally. The difference is probably not statistically significant. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 31.6 shows a sample trade in an Adam & Eve double top and serves as 
a tutorial for using progressive stops to protect profits. 

The Adam top is narrow and composed of a one-day price spike. Eve 
is wider and more rounded-looking. When price closes below the confirma- 
tion line, the twin peaks become a valid double top. How will this pattern 
perform? 

The first thing to notice is that this double top occurs in a bull market. 
That suggests a smaller decline than if it were in a bear market. The S&P 500 
index had just reached a new high on 7 October, but was easing lower on the 
breakout day (16 October). The five stocks in the apparel industry that I follow 
all made highs in October 1997, and by the confirmation date were trending 


492 Double Tops, Adam & Eve 


Invacare Corp (Medical Supplies, NYSE, IVC) 
- 27 
A a 


vy : 
| iy ha | (i N ips Wa VE y 
H | | iv, _ 22 


Ultimate 
Low _21 
Symmetrical 
Triangle - 20 
ay - 19 
- 18 
98 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99_ Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 31.6 To use the measure rule, compute the height of the double top and 
subtract the result from the confirmation line. Price hits the target on the way to 
C in this example. 


downward. That was a good indication that the stock should be sold (if you 
owned it). 

The Eve peak sets the yearly high, and Table 31.4 says that the worst 
performance comes from breakouts within a third of the yearly high. That 
observation sounds a note of caution. 

The support line set up by the ascending triangle in June suggested that 
price would have a difficult time piercing it. Thus, expect a pullback. Table 31.4 
shows that a pullback hurts performance, but the difference is small. 

Is the double top tall? The height as a percentage of the breakout price 
measures 11.41, just under the 11.44% value for a tall pattern. The pattern is 
short, suggesting underperformance. 

Is the pattern narrow? Yes. The pattern is 16 days wide (as measured 
between the highest high in each top). Pattern width makes no difference for 
this chart pattern. 

Which peak is lower? The Adam peak is lower than Eve, and Table 31.11 
says that there is a small performance boost (one percentage point) for that 
combination. 

This analysis showed mixed technical evidence (which is typical). If you 
owned the stock, you could sell on the breakout. Waiting for a pullback is a 


Sample Trade 493 


risk because they occur 64% of the time, but with underlying support by the 
ascending triangle, a pullback was a good bet. 

If you wanted to short this stock, the timing is the same. Short at the 
breakout and add to your position if price turned downward after the pullback 
completed, or just short when price dropped again after the pullback. 

Say you short the stock at the breakout. Price pulls back, then drops to 
point A. Since that is a new minor low, place the stop a dime or so above the 
top of the pullback, the closest minor high. Price climbs to B, then drops to C. 
C is lower than A, so it is a new minor low. Lower the stop to B. Price climbs 
to D, then drops to E. Move the stop to D. Since the drop from D to E is far, 
you might want to cut the distance to the next stop location. 

Keep moving the stop lower as price drops. A new low on the way to H 
means the stop is lowered to F. That is 17% away from the low at H (measured 
from high to low), but with this volatile stock, I would tighten the stop because 
price is going nearly vertical. 

When I see price finish three moves in a row where price makes a lower 
low and lower high (like you see on the way down to H), I will move the stop 
to the top of the prior price bar and trail it lower. If you did that, it would cash 
you out the day after H. 

Let’s assume you didn’t do that. How do you sell? If the stock rises, the stop 
will take you out automatically. Another way is to see the head-and-shoulders 
bottom forming at GHK. A neckline drawn from F to J and extended to the 
right marks the breakout price for that chart pattern. Cover your short at the 
open the day after price closes above the neckline. 

If you traded this stock, you would have made about 16%. That value 
matches the average decline for double tops (see Table 31.2). 


32 


Double Tops, Eve & Adam 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price climbs to twin peaks that top out at about the same price. The left 
peak looks wide and rounded, but the right peak is narrow and sharp, an inverted V 
shape. Price drops after the right peak. 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish reversal 

Performance rank 16 out of 36 

Breakeven failure rate 21% 

Average drop 15% 

Volume trend Upward 

Pullbacks 64% 

Percentage meeting price target 55% 

See also Double Tops, Adam & Adam; Double Tops, 


Adam & Eve; Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


The Results Snapshot shows the important statistics for the Eve & Adam 
double top. This pattern is rare. It has just a few more samples than the rarest 
of the four combinations of Adam and Eve double tops. 

The average decline (15%) meets the value of all chart patterns (15%), 
giving it a performance rank of 16 out of 36 where 1 is best. That’s just above 
the halfway mark. Failures have a rank of 14 out of 36 (not shown). 


494 


Tour 495 


The volume trend is random, really, with 51% trending upward. Pull- 
backs occur with the same frequency that we see in other chart patterns, hap- 
pening in almost two out of three cases. 

Price meets the measure rule target just over half the time, suggesting 
price doesn’t drop as far as one might expect or hope. 

Let’s take a quick tour. 


Tour 


Figure 32.1 shows what a double top looks like. The Eve top is wide and 
rounded-looking compared to the Adam top, which appears narrow, like an 
inverted V, usually with a long, one- or two-day price spike. The pattern forms 
after an upward price trend and does not become a true double top until price 
closes below the confirmation line. Only then should a trader take a position 
in the stock or sell an existing holding. 

This figure also shows good examples of gaps: breakaway, continuation, 
and exhaustion. The first of the trio appears just before confirmation and leads 
to the ultimate low in September. Another pair begins in December with a 
breakaway gap overlapping the earlier continuation gap and creating a price 


CNF Inc (Trucking/Transportation Leasing, NYSE, CNF) 


ia i - Adam i } : : 
| 
| i yA ay i Vy pe 
la yr \ “31 
| ! 1 | \ Mi i" Breakaway id ‘ - 30 
xhaustion - 29 
Ml il 1M — | 
\ Continuation Breakaway ~ 27 
- 26 
Ay owe 
| ah ‘ 24 
Exhaustion yt | - 23 
FS : 
= 21 
= 20 
01 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 02 Feb = 


Figure 32.1 This isa good example of an Eve & Adam double top, except for the 
volume trend. Volume is usually heavier on the right top than the left. Gaps set off 
an island reversal chart pattern in September and December. 


496 Double Tops, Eve & Adam 


island from September to December. An exhaustion gap signals the end of the 
fast, uphill run. After that, price still climbs, but at a more sedate pace. 


Identification Guidelines 


How do you distinguish an Eve & Adam double top from any ordinary twin- 
peak pattern? Look at Figure 32.2 and Table 32.1 for the answer. The figure 
shows two Eve & Adam double tops. 

Appearance. Look for two peaks; the left one, Eve, should be wider and 
more rounded-looking than the right one, Adam. Adam is narrow, usually an 
inverted V shape, and many times with a one- or two-day price spike. Above all 
else, the two tops should look different from each other. 

In the figure, the difference between the shapes of the two peaks in each 
case is clear. To help gauge the width, look farther down the top, toward the 
base of the chart pattern. Adam peaks usually remain narrow, but Eve is wide. 
For example, the May double top at a price of 29 shows Adam as a one-day 
price spike, but Eve is much wider. 

Price trend. To create a top, price must be trending upward, even if the 
trend is short. For reference, the median price trend leading to the double top 
in the stocks I looked at was 123 days, or about 4 months long. 


Cognex (Precision Instruments, NASDAQ, CGNX) 


Adam 
Eve - 35 


i 7 33 
Eve = ba |, ri 
h Ny i v 
LAN | . i jo: 
a ! hay 2 - 


- 18 


, lt 
"yy! | - 27 


| Confirmation 
Line 


n 1 


- 14 
Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 32.2 Two twin peaks confirm as Eve & Adam double tops when price 
closes below the confirmation line. 


Characteristic 


Identification Guidelines 497 


Table 32.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


Appearance 


Price trend 


Valley between tops 


Top high price 
Top separation 


Price decline 
after right top 


Volume 


Breakout direction, 
confirmation 


Price rises into a twin-peak pattern. The left peak is an Eve top, and 
the right one is an Adam peak. Price must drop and confirm the 
pattern after the Adam peak. 

Price trends upward leading to the pattern and should not form a 
third peak, nor should the twin peaks be part of the same con- 
solidation pattern. Look for two minor highs. 

Patterns with a large dip (a tall pattern) perform better than small 
(short) ones. The median valley depth is 9%. 

Top-to-top price variation is small: 1% (median). 

Tops should be at least a few weeks apart (median 22 days). 

Price must close below the confirmation point without first rising 
above the right top high. 


Higher on the right top but only 51% of the time. 


The breakout is downward when price closes below the lowest 
valley between the two tops. A downward breakout confirms the 
pattern as a valid double top. 


Valley between tops. Look for a price dip between the two tops. Some 
will say 10% is the minimum, but I did not use a limitation. The median drop 
I found in my patterns was 9%. The dip separates the two tops, so they are not 
part of the same consolidation region. 

Top high price. The highest high on the left peak should be close to the 
price of the right one. Often the differences are small (median of 1%). Many 
times I’Il select patterns with peaks obviously not at the same price as long as 
they appear in the spirit of a twin-peak pattern. 

Top separation. The median top separation was 22 days, measured from 
the highest high in each peak. What you want to see are two minor highs, well 
separated and defined. 

Price decline after right top. Price must close below the confirmation 
price without first forming a third peak. If a third peak appears before confir- 
mation, then trade the pattern as a triple top (but check that it confirms as a 
valid chart pattern). 

Volume. Of the four types of Adam and Eve double tops, this is the only 
one to have volume heavier on the right top. However, it’s nearly random with 
51% showing volume higher on the right peak. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. Price breaks out downward from 


the pattern, by definition. If price closes above the top of the highest peak in 
the pattern, then it’s not a double top. When price breaks out downward, it 
confirms the pattern as valid. 


498 Double Tops, Eve & Adam 


Focus on Failures 


Why do double tops fail? There are many reasons, including a general market 
that reverses trend. Since a rising tide lifts all boats, your stock may climb 
with the bull market or falter if the company is struggling. If other stocks 
in the industry are doing well, that activity will tend to support the stock. 
Fundamental factors, such as good retail sales, an exceptionally good quarter, 
insider buying, a stock buyback program, or positive comments about the 
future made by management will all help boost the stock price. However, the 
one key element I find time after time is an impenetrable support zone below 
the chart pattern. Figure 32.3 shows an example. 

A support zone forms as far back as January 1997 at about 12.50. I 
show a portion of the zone’s top at the support line (the support line can act 
as both support and resistance, depending on which way price approaches 
the line). Peaks in October through November and congestion at B add 
to the massive support. The support was enough to turn back price at A 
and stall the downtrend at C. I would expect price to pause there on the 
way up, too, which it did several times, as late as 2007, a decade after the 
zone started. 


Global Industries, Ltd (Oilfield Svcs/Equipment, NASDAQ, 1 


Adam by | 2g 
iy iA i | | ‘ 
| I = "15 


Support 


Il : 
\ Wy Mf 


00 Oct Nov Dec Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


(" i! 


Figure 32.3 Support at point B and the many peaks in October through Novem- 
ber stop the price decline at A. The support zone also caused congestion at C. 


Statistics 499 


Statistics 


Table 32.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I uncovered 777 double tops in 513 stocks starting from 
July 1991 to March 2020. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some 
no longer trade. Bear market patterns numbered 115, too few to make the cut 
in this edition. I sent them back down to the minor leagues. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition a double top 
acts as a reversal of the upward price trend. 

Average decline. The average decline is, well, average. It’s half a percent- 
age point (15.4%) above the average for all chart patterns (14.9%). 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In bull markets, the S&P index dropped 
4%, helping stocks drop. I measured the drop from the date of breakout to the 
ultimate low of the double top and applied those dates to the index and then 
checked performance. Notice how the average decline is significantly higher 
than that shown by the index. 

Days to ultimate low. It takes just about 7 weeks for price to reach the 
ultimate low. 

How many change trend? A trend change is a drop of more than 20%. 
Eve & Adam chart patterns fall short of the average (28%) for all bearish chart 
patterns. In other words, 27% of double tops will see price drop more than 
20% after the breakout. The higher the number shown in the table the better 
I like the pattern. 

Table 32.3 shows failure rates. How do you read this table? Let me give 
you a few examples. Suppose your total cost of trading is 5%. How many pat- 
terns will fail to drop more than that? Answer: 21% in bull markets. If you 
want to make an additional 10% above your cost (a total of 15%), how many 
double tops will fail see price drop more than 15%? Answer: 61%. That’s a 
huge failure rate for such a small drop. 

In the Trading Tactics section, we’ll discuss the measure rule. Suppose it 
projects a decline from 10 to 8, or 20% in an Eve & Adam pattern you wish 
to trade. How many double tops will see price decline 20% in bull markets? 


Table 32.2 

General Statistics 
Description Down Breakout 
Number found 662 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 
Average decline -15% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 4% 
Days to ultimate low 50 


How many change trend? 27% 


500 _— Double Tops, Eve & Adam 


Table 32.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 142 or 21% 
10 169 or 47% 
15 92 or 61% 
20 79 or 73% 
25 53 or 81% 
30 35 or 86% 
35 33 or 91% 
50 40 or 97% 
75 18 or 100% 
Over 75 1 or 100% 
Table 32.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the 12-month L-18%, M-15%, 

low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H -14% 
Pullbacks occurrence 64% 
Average time to pullback peaks -6% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -14% 
Average decline for patterns without pullbacks -18% 
Percentage price resumes trend 53% 
Performance with breakout day gap -16% 
Performance without breakout day gap -15% 
Average gap size $1.09 


Answer: 27% (73% will fail to decline more than 20%). Thus, the target of 
8 seems like a dream, so make the target more conservative by picking one 
closer to 10. 

Table 32.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. As I mentioned earlier, the breakout is downward 
from a double top by definition. A breakout happens when price closes below 
the lowest valley between the two peaks. 

Yearly position, performance. What position in the yearly high-low 
trading range performs best? Those double tops with breakouts within a third 


Statistics 501 


of the yearly low outperform the other two thirds. You’ll want to avoid trading 
double tops with breakouts near the yearly high. Or to put it another way, if 
you own a stock making new highs and you see a double top, don’t freak out. 
The decline may be less than you expect (and the pattern may not confirm 
anyway). However, you may run across the outlier and have your wallet or 
purse ripped out of your hands, so do your diligence checks. 

Pullbacks. Almost two out of three (64%) Eve & Adam double tops pull 
back to the breakout price and take an average of 12 days to complete the trip. 
When price does pull back, the upward retrace breaks downward momentum 
and performance suffers. At least that’s the story I’m telling everyone. 

After a pullback completes, price returns, trending downward just over 
half the time. 

Before trading, look for underlying support. If a support zone is nearby, 
then bet on a pullback happening. 

Gaps. Gaps hurt performance, as Table 32.4 shows. The performance 
difference is minimal, though. 

Table 32.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. I measured height 
from the higher of the two peaks to the confirmation price, then divided by the 
confirmation price. Results higher than the median, shown in the table, mean 
the pattern was tall. 

Width. I looked at pattern width, measuring between the highest high 
in each peak, and compared that to the median length. Wide patterns outper- 
formed narrow ones. 

Height and width combinations. Patterns both tall and wide performed 
best. Avoid those that are short (either wide or narrow). 


Table 32.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance -18% 
Short pattern performance -13% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 9.6% 
Narrow pattern performance -14% 
Wide pattern performance -17% 
Median width 22 days 
Short and narrow performance -13% 
Short and wide performance -13% 
Tall and wide performance -18% 


Tall and narrow performance -17% 


502 Double Tops, Eve & Adam 


Table 32.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. The volume trend is upward, but only 51% of the time. 
That’s near random. 

Rising/Falling volume, breakout day volume. The next four rows 
show how volume may indicate better or worse performance. Rising or falling 
volume doesn’t affect performance and heavy breakout day volume does help, 
but don’t wake Mom to tell her. She needs her rest. 

Table 32.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the pat- 
tern in half and found that ifI placed a stop at the top of the pattern, the order 
would trigger only 4% of the time. Place the stop-loss order at a different 
location and the hit rate changes. The top of the pattern may be too far away, 
so a potential loss may be expensive. Do check to be sure you can tolerate the 
potential loss without yelling too loudly. 

Table 32.8 shows performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 1990s were the star decade for perfor- 
mance. The other two decades tied for second place. 

Failures over time. The numbers are as I expected. Failures have 
increased in each decade since the 1990s. The trend doesn’t bode well for the 
2020s, but at least the trend is consistent. 

Table 32.9 shows busted pattern performance. As you may know, a bust 
occurs when price breaks out downward, drops no more than 10%, before 
reversing and closing above the taller of the two peaks in the double top. 

Busted patterns count. Almost half of Eve & Adam double tops will 
bust. That’s alarming if you like to sell short. 


Table 32.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Down Breakout 
Volume trend 51% up 
Rising volume trend performance -15% 
Falling volume trend performance -15% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -16% 
Light breakout volume performance -14% 

Table 32.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Down Breakout 
Pattern top 4% 
Middle 18% 


Pattern bottom 70% 


Trading Tactics 503 


Table 32.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Down Breakout 
1990s -18% 
2000s -14% 
2010s -14% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 9% 
2000s 16% 
2010s 27% 
Table 32.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 289 or 44% 
Single bust count 187 or 65% 
Double bust count 9 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 93 or 32% 
Performance for all busted patterns 34% 
Single busted performance 51% 
Non-busted performance (Eve & Adam double bottom) 42% 


Busted occurrence. I sorted each busted pattern into single, double, and 
three or more busts. Single busted patterns occur in almost two of every three 
busted patterns. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used Eve & Adam double Lot- 
toms as the proxy for non-busted patterns. Single busted double tops beat the 
non-busted double bottoms and also the combined performance of single, 
double, and three or more busts (triple+). 

What are the galactic implications of this? Trade a single busted double 
top if you can find one. How can you tell if a double top will bust once only? I 
haven’t figured that out yet. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 32.10 shows trading tactics for double tops. They are similar to other 
double tops. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to help predict a target 
price to which your stock may descend after the breakout. For example, in 


504 Double Tops, Eve & Adam 


Table 32.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Compute the pattern height from the lowest low between the two 


tops to the highest peak and then subtract the height from the 
lowest low. The result is the target price. The bottom portion of the 
table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Wait for breakout Wait for a close below the confirmation point before selling—usually. 


Trade with For best results, short in a bear market. 
market trend 


Check others in To avoid 5% failures, check other stocks in the same industry 


the industry and trade if they are showing topping patterns or if the stocks 
are falling. 
Stop location Consult Table 32.7 for stop placement. 
Busted trade Single busted patterns happen 65% of the time and see price climb 


an average of 51%. Consider trading a busted pattern. 


Description Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 82% 
Percentage reaching full height target 55% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 30% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 17% 


Figure 32.5, the Adam peak is the higher of the two, and it tops out at 34.90. 
The confirmation price is the lowest low between the two peaks, and it is at 
31.70. The difference is 3.20. Subtract the height from the confirmation price 
to get a target of .. . wait a minute. Let me find my calculator. It’s solar pow- 
ered, and I’m using it at night, so maybe you should double-check the result. 
Answer: 28.50. 

Although the measure rule works for the stock shown in Figure 32.5, it 
only works 55% of the time for Eve & Adam double tops. The bottom portion 
of the table shows the target hit rate for various heights. 

You might want to run the potential drop by Table 32.3 and see what it 
says. In this case, a 3.20 drop in a stock with a breakout price of 31.70 is a drop 
of 10%. Table 32.3 says that almost half (47%) of patterns will not drop more 
than 10% after the breakout. It also means 53% will reach the target. Whether 
you decide to trade the potential drop is up to you. 

Wait for breakout. Most of the time, you will want to wait for price to 
confirm the pattern by closing below the confirmation price. If you do not 
wait, there is a 60% chance (I researched this) that price will climb instead of 
confirming. 

However, there are exceptions to the wait for breakout rule. For exam- 
ple, if you see an especially dire situation developing in a stock you own, then 


Trading Tactics 505 


protect your profits and sell early. If the market or industry is dropping and 
there was a quick rise leading to the pattern, then consider selling early (a 
quick decline sometimes follows a quick rise, but it’s rarer than you might 
expect). Other technical indicators may suggest a sale, so check those, too. 

Trade with market trend. Avoid shorting a stock in a raging bull market 
unless the situation warrants. In bull markets, it may make sense to hold onto 
a stock and weather the downturn. Look for underlying support that would 
stop a decline. Usually, when the bull market is pushing price skyward, it is a 
mistake to sell when seeing a double top. Chances are that in a few weeks or 
months the stock’s price will be higher. Swing traders and short-term traders, 
however, will want to sell as soon as the pattern confirms (to lock in a long-side 
profit), then look elsewhere for another trading opportunity. 

Check others in the industry. Look at how the general market and 
other stocks in the same industry are behaving. That activity is often key to 
how your stock will perform. If other stocks in the industry are falling or show- 
ing signs of topping out, chances are your stock will decline, too. If so, it is best 
to sell a long holding or consider shorting the stock. 

Stop location. Table 32.7 shows guidance for stop placement, so look at 
the numbers and read the brief description. Be sure to change the potential 
loss into a percentage and check Table 32.3 to see how often price declines that 
far after a double top breakout. 

Busted trade. If you want the potential to make big bucks, trade a busted 
Eve & Adam double top. Busted double tops beat Eve & Adam double bottoms 
in performance. See Table 32.9 for highlights. 

This just in: Table 32.11 shows special features of the double top! 

‘Top-to-top variation. I looked at the price variation between the high- 
est high in each peak. When the difference was larger than the median 1%, the 
double top tended to outperform after the breakout. This trend is also true for 
the other Adam and Eve variations. 

Lower top. Do patterns with a lower right peak perform better? No, but 
the performance difference when the left top is lower is minimal. 


Table 32.11 
Special Features 
Trading Tactic Performance 
Small top-to-top variation 14% 
Large variation 16% 
Median top-to-top variation 1% 
Lower left top 16% 


Lower right top 15% 


506 Double Tops, Eve & Adam 


Experience 


Figure 32.4 shows an actual trade I made in Bed Bath and Beyond (BBBY), 
starting in the summer of 1996. 

My buy reason is long and complicated, so I won’t discuss it much. 
However, maybe you can make sense of it or find it useful as a bedtime story. 
“22 July 1996. I purchased at 5.81 [split adjusted] today, at the market. Yes- 
terday, I was reviewing my trend channel trades notebook and noticed that 
MACD [moving average convergence/divergence indicator] forewarned me 
not to purchase Varco the first time and to wait on HMSY. This indicator 
parallels the OBV [on-balance volume] & Bollinger band indicators. So, I 
compared its signal with BBBY and it said buy. OBV & Bollinger band said 
purchase was OK, too. It just bounced off the trend channel bottom three days 
ago [B] after hovering there for a while. 

“Although I am late off the channel bottom in buying the stock, I trust it 
will continue rising [it eased lower for a month]. I did not buy earlier because 
general market conditions were horrible (general downturn) and I believed 
that the stock would continue down. When it turned around, I bought. 

“VL [Value Line] ranks the stock 1, 3 with a technical rank of 1 as of 
28 June (yeah, almost a month ago). With its 30% annual growth rate in new 
stores, and other fundamental factors, this stock could be a good holding for 
the long haul. If they can continue store growth with internally generated cash 
flow, this will be a good stock to own. 

“After placing the order last night, I had second thoughts. I think the 
stock will fall back to its consolidation range, $4.75-5.00 [it hit 5 exactly a 


Bed Bath and Beyond (BBBY) 


Ta adh a 
Vint 


ty < ou A So 2 
nN : \ Mh WW x 


-4 
96 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov _ Dec Jan97 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 32.4 An actual trade made 52% using a potential double top as a 
sell signal. 


Sample Trade 507 


day after I bought]. It makes me nervous to buy after the stock has climbed so 
quickly. Will intuition be right or will the mind prevail? 

“In any case, although I have been watching this stock as a buy candidate 
for a few weeks now, I was uneasy with the rapidity that I bought this one. 
Once I noticed that MACD said it was a buy, I checked a few things, then 
placed the order. Much too quick and not thorough enough.” 

I don’t know where the trend channel was, but the notebook entry made 
mention of the channel 3 days before I bought, which I show as B. I bought at 
A, well above the low at B. 

On October 6, I made mention of a small cup-with-handle pattern. I show 
that as CD (cup) with handle E. Yes, the cup bottom isn’t rounded at all. It’s 
more like an ugly double bottom as part of a big W (a pattern with a higher 
second bottom (the ugly part) and one with tall sides—the big W). 

Let’s advance the timeline to 4 October 1997, a year later. “I placed an 
order to sell half my holdings at the market tomorrow. Why? A budding double 
top formation. I know that you should wait for confirmation, but the decline to 
7.63 from the current 8.75 is just too far to wait. If it continues to rise (funda- 
mentally speaking, the prospects are bright), then I still have half my holdings. 
If it declines to the formation base, at 7.63, or continues on down for another 
18% (average for a [double top] reversal), then [’ll have the opportunity to buy 
more. Also, the top at 9.06 is slightly higher than the prior top, 9.03, which is 
slightly more likely for a double top.” 

I show the sale at H. The “budding double top” is at F and G. My spread- 
sheet of the trade calls this an Eve & Adam double top, but is it really? My 
computer will tell you it’s an Eve & Eve, and I think it’s an Adam & Eve. That’s 
the problem with Adam and Eve designations. It’s too subjective. 

Anyway, I made 52% on the trade. The stock reached the ultimate low at 
I, at 7.20 or 19% below where I sold (at 8.88). Then the stock recovered and 
peaked at 14.48 in June 1998. 


¢ Lesson: If you think a double top is forming, consider selling near the 
second peak. If you’re right, it could save you money as price drops to 
confirmation. However, price won’t confirm a double top 60% of the 
time, meaning price will rise instead of drop. 


In this trade, selling half of my holding worked well. On the second half 
of the trade, I made 153%. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 32.5 shows a sample trade for an Eve & Adam double top. As you look 
at the figure, it may strike you that the double top takes place in a downward 
price trend, beginning with the high on the left side of the chart and sliding 
to the low at the right. It reminds me of a measured move down chart pattern. 


508 = Double Tops, Eve & Adam 


Home Depot, Inc (Retail Building Supply, NYSE, HD) 
yn 


r 
aN 
(or) 


a 


4 
" 4M, 


lr 
Mi 


AAA A 
ONDA A 


Prrrrr rrr rrr rrr rid 
Ww 
foe} 


Mh 
| Wt I é Adam 


| Ev 
| \  ® mi 


Confirmation Line 


30 


| - 24 
i! |- 23 


| ily ail - 22 
Ht | yey - 21 
! - 20 


- 19 

- 18 

-17 

\_4 - 16 

- 15 

02 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan03 ‘Feb 

Figure 32.5 This Eve & Adam pattern had a quick rise followed by a quick decline. 

The decline stalled near the trendline support. 


Does the pattern obey the guidelines listed in Table 32.1? The brief 
rise shown by line A satisfies the upward price trend leading to the double 
top. The twin-peak pattern shows a rounded Eve top paired with a pointed 
Adam top. The valley between the tops measures 9%—a bit on the short 
side, but who’s counting? The two tops have prices that vary by just 1% and 
are 25 days apart. Price drops to the confirmation line without making a 
third peak. Volume is heavier on the left peak than the right, which is unu- 
sual, but that’s okay. Thus, the pattern meets the identification guidelines: It 
is a valid Eve & Adam double top. 

What is so special about this double top? Two things. First, the U-shaped 
volume pattern is exquisite. Second, notice the quick rise leading to the pat- 
tern, highlighted by line A. Price rockets upward for a week, then moves side- 
ways in the double top. Nearly as steep is the decline out of the pattern, shown 
by line B. If I were trading this double top, I would place an order to sell shares 
at the confirmation line. That way, I would get in at a good price as the pattern 
confirmed. 

I would expect a pullback because of the July congestion (shown in the 
first third of the long trendline ending at C). Worst case, I would put a stop at 
the Adam top, just in case things got out of control. 

For the downward target, the measure rule predicts a decline to 28.50, 
as I discussed in the “Measure rule” in Table 32.10. Since I know that a quick 
decline can follow a quick rise, I would set the target lower, at the beginning 
of the quick rise, or about 27.78. Since that is below the round number 28, 


Sample Trade 509 


I would probably target 28.07 or some oddball number above that support. 
Everyone is going to try buying at 28, and I want to get my price before the 
others drive it back up. 

In fact, you can see that price stalled at 28 for 3 days before resuming 
the tumble (point D in Figure 32.5). If, by some magic, I stayed in the trade, 
I would expect a further decline to the down-sloping trendline. A rising vol- 
ume trend as price declined is a good sign of a strong down move. 

The quick rise after C suggests you need to be on top of this stock, follow- 
ing it closely to time the exit if you do not use a stop order. Delays are costly. 


33 


Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: ‘Two peaks appear at about the same price level. Both peaks have wide, 
rounded-looking turns. 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish reversal 

Performance rank 12 out of 36 

Breakeven failure rate 20% 

Average drop 16% 

Volume trend Downward 

Pullbacks 65% 

Percentage meeting price target 43% 

See also Double tops, Adam & Adam; double 
tops, Adam & Eve; double tops, 
Eve & Adam 


When traders say, “double top,” they are most likely referring to an Eve 
& Eve double top. This is the classic double top, but performance places it 
behind the Adam & Eve double top. 

The above performance rank (12 out of 36 where 1 is best) shows the 
chart pattern is near the top tier among the family of chart patterns. The 
breakeven failure rate is better than the average of 24.7% for types of all chart 
pattern, but it ranks 11 there (not shown). 


510 


Tour 511 


Volume trends downward 59% of the time and pullbacks happen about 
two of every three trades. Let me share some family photos with you of the 
pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 33.1 shows what an Eve & Eve double top looks like. It reminds me of 
a person with large eyebrows, the confirmation line points to the nose, and the 
mouth is the U-shaped volume pattern. 

In the second edition I discussed volume shapes, but decided in the third 
edition that volume shape was too subjective. If the pattern was long, it could 
have several volume shapes involved. That confused the issue. Volume shape 
was an interesting idea that didn’t add trading value. So I removed it. Now ’m 
wondering if the shape of price between the two peaks adds value. I’ll consider 
exploring that another time, but look for price to form a valley between the 
peaks, making the two peaks stand out. 

The twin peaks look similar in that both have wide bases and a gentle 
(but not necessarily smooth) price turn at each top. Contrast the two Eve peaks 
with the two Adam peaks in March and April. Those peaks are narrow, and 
a one-day price spike soars above the surrounding landscape. If price spikes 


Delta Air Lines, Inc (Air Transport, NYSE, DAL) 


MM ly 15 
ny | Mi 7 
H lh ! Eve Eve 4 - i: 
|| Mi : l ws aa | yh | - 14 
| \ tin Ih | Wall 13 
\ \ ‘al I e \ “a i tas 
ls onfirmation 

a My " ; ie : | | - 

Vi Nh 


i aad = 


| any 


02 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 03 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 33.1 The twin-peak Eve tops become a valid Eve & Eve double top when 
price closes below the confirmation line. 


512 Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


appear in an Eve top, they are often more numerous and short (although not 
in Figure 33.1). 

A better version of the Adam shape is the two lowest valleys on the chart 
(October and March). Yes, they are bottoms but narrow, V-shaped turns. Flip 
them upside-down and they would make terrific Adam tops. 

What should a trader look for when selecting reliable (low failure rate 
and high price performance) twin peak patterns? 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 33.1 shows identification guidelines for Eve & Eve double tops. Refer 
to Figure 33.2 for an example. 

Appearance. The two tops should look similar to each other. That is, the 
wide and rounded September peak should not look like the narrow price spike 
of the Adam peak in April. Although the August Eve peak has a twin spike, the 
top is wide enough to mirror the September peak, so I classify it as an Eve top, 
too. Adam tops look more like the peak that “Pullback” points to in the figure. 
The width does not widen much as you scan down the pattern. Both Eve peaks 
are considerably wider than the Adam “Pullback” one. 

Price trend. Since we are dealing with tops, price must trend upward 
leading to the start of the pattern and leave the pattern heading downward. 


Table 33.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Both Eve peaks should appear rounded and wide, not made of 


a single, narrow price spike. The two peaks should look the 
same and sit atop an upward inbound price trend and break 
out downward. 


Price trend Price trends upward leading to the pattern and should not form 
a third peak, nor should the twin peaks be part of the same 
consolidation pattern. Look for two distinct minor highs. 


Valley between tops The median valley depth is 12%, but the drop isn’t critical to 


performance. 
Top high price Top-to-top price variation is small. One percent is the median. 
Top separation Tops should be at least a few weeks apart with the median being 
36 days wide. 
Price decline Price must close below the confirmation point without first rising 
after right top above the right top high. 
Volume Usually heavier on the left top than the right, but allow exceptions. 


Breakout direction, The breakout is downward when price closes below the lowest 
confirmation valley between the two tops. A downward breakout confirms the 
pattern as a valid double bottom. 


Identification Guidelines 513 


Diamond Offshore (Oilfield Svcs/Equipment, NYSE, DO) 
AX AX - 42 


fy 
if 


; Li - 38 


Adam 


NN, A 
Wy Ah 


r 


Confirmation 


Hy : 
| | iy My | 
, Mh f\ im [ 


- 26 


- 25 
- 24 

99 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan0O Feb rar” 
Figure 33.2 Two peaks, similar in appearance, stand atop the price trend and 
act as a reversal. 


The upward price trend leading to the double top need not be long. Figure 33.2 
shows a steep 48-day uptrend from the late June low. 

Valley between tops. The valley between the tops varies in depth. The 
figure shows a dip of 14%, measured from the highest high to the lowest 
low in the pattern. The depth measure is just a guideline, not a rule, so allow 
variations. I will say that dips larger than the median perform slightly better 
(by two percentage points). 

Top high price. The peaks should top out near the same high price. The 
usual price difference between the two peaks is tiny, 1% (median). The peaks 
should not look like stair-steps, but like two tops hitting overhead resistance 
near the same price. Figure 33.2 shows tops with almost no (0.29%) price 
difference. 

In patterns I look at for my trading, ’m not that concerned with whether 
the two peaks align in price. As long as they appear Eve-shaped and look like a 
topping pattern, then I’m fine with it. 

Top separation. Look for two well-separated peaks, not twin bumps that 
are part of the same congestion pattern. The double top in the figure, for 
example, shows peaks 33 days apart (measured between the two highest price 
bars), and that’s typical. 

Price decline after right top. Price must close below the confirmation 
line to validate the double top pattern. If a double top forms a third peak 
before price closes below the confirmation line, then consider it a triple top 
and trade it as such. 


514 Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


Volume. Volume varies but is usually heavier on the left top than on the 
right. However, do not exclude a potential double top just because volume is 
heavier on the right peak than the left. 

Breakout direction. When price closes below the lowest valley between 
the two peaks, it stages a downward breakout. If price closes above the top of 
the pattern first, then it’s not a double top. 

When price breaks out downward, it confirms the pattern as a true double 
top. Investing without waiting for confirmation is usually an amateur’s game, 
one that ends in a loss or missed profits. 

Why do I say that? A study of twin-peak patterns found that 60% climbed 
away from the pattern instead of dropping down to the confirmation line. The 
potential double top remained just squiggles on the price chart and not a valid 
double top pattern. 

Figure 33.3 shows another example of an Eve & Eve double top. The 
right peak looks like two Adam tops, but the peak separation is not wide enough 
to call the three peaks a triple top. The landscape looks like two hills with the 
right hill having a few tall trees but still forming one hill. 

Running through the identification guidelines, we see that price trends 
upward to the first top. The two tops look rounded, and the valley between 
them separates the peaks into two individual hills. The price variation between 
the two tops is considered large for statistical purposes, measuring 3%, but the 
tops look like they stop near the same price. Volume is heavier on the right 


DoubleClick, Inc (Internet, NASDAQ, DCLK) 


Eve 

! “ip , ih - 13 

Hl] 12 

i i] yi Ih ' AN f ik 

il Th commen - 10 
\ Confirmation Line i) l \ 7 


, II - 
i oh My ‘ 4 


i 


01 = Oct Nov Dec Jan02 Feb = Mar _— Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 33.3. An Eve & Eve double top reverses the upward price trend. The pat- 
tern confirms as a valid double top when price closes below the confirmation line. 


Focus on Failures 515 


peak than the left (using 2 days before to 2 days after the highest high in each 
peak), which is unusual. Price confirms the pattern in April when it closes 
below the confirmation line. Within a month, price pulls back to the confirma- 
tion line before resuming the downtrend. 


Focus on Failures 


What does an Eve & Eve double top failure look like and can anything be 
learned from it? Consider Figure 33.4, a common failure of a double top. The 
twin peaks satisfy all of the identification guidelines outlined in Table 33.1 
with two exceptions. 

First, the volume pattern is suspect. Volume on creation of the left top is 
high but lasts only 1 day. The right top volume is dense, high, and remains high 
for about a week as the top forms. However, in defense of the double top, the 
volume pattern often varies from the norm and offers little clue to the eventual 
outcome. In other words, the volume pattern doesn’t offer much help in decid- 
ing if this pattern will succeed or fail. 

The second guideline violated is the more important of the two: Price 
fails to close below the confirmation point. As I mentioned, this type of failure 
(failure to achieve confirmation) happens 60% of the time. 

Expect top reversals (such as the double top) to perform poorly in bull 
markets, whereas bullish bottom reversals should excel. That appears to be the 
case with many of the chart patterns covered in this book. 


Fairchild Corporation A (Industrial Services, NYSE, FA) 


' ! -13 
Ht -12 
|" -11 

Eve Eve | -~10 


i a] 
hy | 
! "Hh, 
Je! 


Mona, hl : arr 
" Confirmation Line 7 
I 7 
Pon. an Y 
| 1 ' Lapel 


i 
ft 
i 


in | ptt -9 
liste Jt eet 


Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 33.4 A common double top failure. Price declines after the second peak, 
then rises before reaching the confirmation point. 


516 Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


Another type of failure not shown in the figure is what I call a 5% failure. 
Price fails to drop more than 5% after the breakout. One in five (20%) double 
tops will suffer a 5% failure. Compared to other chart pattern types, that’s 
relatively low, but 20% isn’t exactly zero. 

Speaking of numbers, let’s talk about them. 


Statistics 


Table 33.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,196 double tops in 692 stocks starting from 
July 1991 to February 2020. Not all stocks covered the entire span, and some 
no longer trade. There were too few double tops appearing in bear markets, so 
I decided not to cover them in this edition. That’s why the table shows fewer 
found. The statistics only apply to bull markets. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, double tops 
act as reversals of the prevailing price trend: Price rises into the pattern and 
leaves heading back down. 

Average decline. The average decline for all chart pattern types is 14.9%, 
so the Eve & Eve double top does a bit better than that. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The index declined, and I believe it 
helped the double top show better performance. You can also look at this as 
how well the index did compared to the double top. Both use the same dates 
from the double top: breakout to ultimate low. The double top performed four 
times as well as the index, on average. 

Days to ultimate low. It took about 2 months for price to reach the 
ultimate low after the breakout. You may wish to compare the 16% drop in 
2 months with other investments to see if they perform as well. However, these 
numbers are for perfect trades and are an average, so you mileage may vary. 

How many change trend? This is my attempt to create a gauge for how 
trendy a pattern is. I counted how often price fell more than 20% from the 
breakout. That’s not a good definition of trendy, however. Even so, Eve & Eve 
ranks 12 out of 36 where | is best, so this chart pattern performs well. 


Table 33.2 

General Statistics 
Description Down Breakout 
Number found 942 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 
Average decline -16% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 4% 
Days to ultimate low 56 


How many change trend? 29% 


Statistics 517 


Table 33.3 shows failure rates for double tops. You read a row like this: 
I found that 20% of the double tops failed to see price drop by more than 5%. 
A decline of 10% sees the failure rate double to 40%. Yikes! It almost triples 
the 5% failure rate in the next row down in the table (where 58% fail to see 
price drop more than 15%). 

Table 33.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. In confirmed double tops, the breakout direction is 
always downward. 


Table 33.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 188 or 20% 
10 187 or 40% 
15 167 or 58% 
20 124 or 71% 
25 91 or 80% 
30 50 or 86% 
35 45 or 90% 
50 66 or 97% 
75 23 or 100% 
Over 75 1 or 100% 
Table 33.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the 12-month L-16%, M-16%, 

low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H -15% 
Pullbacks occurrence 65% 
Average time to pullback peaks -7% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -15% 
Average decline for patterns without pullbacks -18% 
Percentage price resumes trend 55% 
Performance with breakout day gap -16% 
Performance without breakout day gap -16% 


Average gap size $0.94 


518 Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


Yearly position, performance. Patterns with breakouts within a third of 
the yearly high perform worst, but the numbers are close enough that the dif- 
ferences are not meaningful (probably not statistically significant). 

Pullbacks. A pullback takes 12 days, on average, for the stock to return to 
the breakout price. When a pullback happens, performance suffers, as the table 
shows. Look for underlying support and avoid double tops with support close 
enough to cause a pullback. How close is close? The median drop during a pull- 
back is 6%, so use that as a gauge to look for nearby support (that far down). 

After a pullback completes, price resumes the downtrend just over half 
the time. That also means price reaches the ultimate low during a pullback 
45% of the time (and price rises thereafter). 

Gaps. Whether a gap occurs or doesn’t occur, I didn’t see any perfor- 
mance difference. 

Table 33.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Double tops continue a tradition of seeing tall patterns perform- 
ing better than short ones. To use this finding, measure the height from the 
higher of the two peaks to the confirmation line and divide by the breakout 
price (the value of the confirmation line). If the result is higher than the median 
shown in the table, then you have a tall pattern. Trade only tall patterns for the 
best average performance. 

Width. Width does not show any performance advantage for double 
tops. However, in many other chart pattern types, wide patterns usually (85% 
of the time) show better performance. 

Height and width combinations. I looked at the height and width com- 
binations and found that the best performing patterns were tall and narrow 
ones. Tall and wide patterns place a close second. The worst performance came 


Table 33.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance -17% 
Short pattern performance -15% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 13.7% 
Narrow pattern performance -16% 
Wide pattern performance -16% 
Median width 36 days 
Short and narrow performance -15% 
Short and wide performance -13% 
Tall and wide performance -17% 


Tall and narrow performance -18% 


Statistics 519 


from double tops that were short and wide. Avoid those by comparing the dou- 
ble top you plan to trade with the median measures shown in the table. 

Table 33.6 shows volume-related statistics, and I don’t see much to be 
excited about. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward 59% of the time. I found this 
using linear regression as measured from peak to peak. 

Rising/Falling volume. Double tops that see price rise from the left 
peak to the right have a slight performance edge. It’s not an earth-shaking dif- 
ference, but it is an edge. 

Breakout day volume. I saw no performance difference between heavy 
or light breakout volume, but many technical traders will say that heavy break- 
out day volume is best. A scan of other chart patterns shows that heavy break- 
out volume does help performance most of the time. I discussed this in the 
first chapter. 

Table 33.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. If you place a 
stop-loss order at the higher of the two peaks, you'll be stopped out 1% of the 
time, on average, if you trade it often enough and if your stocks perform like 
the nearly 1,000 patterns I examined for Eve & Eve double tops. Other loca- 
tions show higher stop-out rates. 

Once you determine where the stop should go, then divide the potential 
loss by the current price (as a percentage) and see if you can tolerate such a 
loss. If not, then move your stop closer (increasing the stop-out risk) or just 
look for another chart pattern to trade. You don’t have to trade the one you’re 
looking it. In fact, if you fall in love with (or hate) the stock, it’s probably a 
signal you’re making a mistake (you’re letting emotions rule). 


Table 33.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Down Breakout 
Volume trend 59% down 
Rising volume trend performance -17% 
Falling volume trend performance -15% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -16% 
Light breakout volume performance -16% 

Table 33.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Down Breakout 
Pattern top 1% 
Middle 12% 


Pattern bottom 71% 


520 Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


Table 33.8 shows double top performance over three decades. The two 
bear markets in the 2000s were not included in the statistics. 

Performance over time. The 1990s were the best performing decade for 
Eve & Eve, but the other two decades are close behind. 

Failures over time. Failures have steadily increased over the decades. 
It makes you wonder what the 2020s will bring. 

Table 33.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Only about a third of the double tops will bust. 
That’s quite good for a bearish pattern. 

Busted occurrence. Single busted patterns, which we’ll see as outstand- 
ing performers next, happen two-thirds of the time (from those patterns which 
bust). Placing second are three or more busts (triple+), not double busts. That’s 
not unusual, though. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used Eve & Eve double bottoms 
as the proxy for a double top with an upward breakout (which doesn’t exist, by 
definition). Single busted patterns outperformed the double bottom and the 
“all busted” combination of single, double, and triple+ busts. 


Table 33.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Down Breakout 
1990s -17% 
2000s -15% 
2010s -15% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 15% 
2000s 19% 
2010s 25% 

Table 33.9 

Busted Patterns 

Description Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 341 or 36% 
Single bust count 229 or 67% 
Double bust count 18 or 5% 
Triple+ bust count 94 or 28% 
Performance for all busted patterns 38% 
Single busted performance 54% 


Non-busted performance (Eve & Eve double bottoms) 50% 


Trading Tactics 521 


What does this mean? You could trade an Eve & Eve double top in the 
normal manner and average 16% if you trade it often enough and perfectly 
(from Table 33.2). Or you can trade a busted double top, and if it single busts, 
you can make an average of 54%. There are a lot of ifs involved in this, includ- 
ing trading the stock perfectly and trading only patterns which single bust. But 
I’d rather have a chance of making 54% than 16%. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 33.10 shows trading tactics, but you'll discover they are similar to other 
double top patterns. 

Measure rule. Use the measure rule to help gauge how far price will 
decline after the breakout. Take the difference between the highest high in 
the pattern (the higher of the two peaks) and the valley low (between the two 
peaks). Subtract the height from the confirmation price to get the target. 

For example, the double top shown in Figure 33.5 has the highest high 
on the left peak at 32.45. The lowest low is at the breakout, 28, for a height of 


Table 33.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the pattern height from the lowest low between the two 
tops to the highest peak. Subtract the result from the lowest low. 
The result is the target price. The bottom portion of the table 
shows how often the measure rule works. 

Wait for breakout 

Trade with 
market trend 

Check others in 
the industry 


Wait for 


Wait for a close below the confirmation point before selling—usually. 
For best results, short in a bear market. 


To avoid 5% failures, check other stocks in the same industry and 
trade if they are showing topping patterns or if they are falling. 


If you can determine when the stock bottoms or if the pattern 


trend change 
Stop location 
Busted trade 
Tips 


Description 


busts, then buy. 
See Table 33.7 for guidance. 
Single busted patterns outperform. See Table 33.9. 
See text. 


Down Breakout 


Percentage reaching half height target 
Percentage reaching full height target 
Percentage reaching 2x height 


71% 
43% 
19% 
11% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 


522 Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


4.45. Subtract the result from the lowest low to find the target of 23.55. Price 
fails to reach the target as the stock drops to B. 

How often does the measure rule work? Glad you asked because I pro- 
vide the answer in the lower portion of the table. Using the full height, as in 
the example above, price reaches the target just 43% of the time. Maybe that 
explains why the stock in the figure didn’t drop that far. 

If you cut the height in half and use that in the computation, you'll see 
that the stock reached the closer target (25.77) on the way to B. 

For another check, convert the target distance into a percentage of the 
current price. In this example that’s 4.45/28 or 16%. Table 33.3 says that 58% 
of the stock will fail to see price drop more than 15%. That means 42% will 
work as you hope, and that’s not a good probability in my opinion. 

Wait for breakout. Since 60% of twin-peak patterns never confirm 
(price trends higher), you should wait for the breakout before selling a long 
holding or shorting a stock. The exception to this rule is if you have a compel- 
ling situation that demands a quick exit. 

For example, if price just completed the turn at the second top and the 
company issues an earnings warning, sending the stock tumbling, then con- 
sider selling immediately. Chances are that the next quarter will also be bad 
(but this depends on why earnings are soft; some problems are easily fixed 
while others are not). 

Trade with market trend. Eve & Eve double tops are bearish chart 
patterns, so it makes sense to trade them in bear markets, not in bull markets. 
If you own stock in a bull market and it double tops, can you weather the 
downturn? If the general market is soft when your stock double tops, maybe 
it is time to sell. Me? I ignore double tops because the decline is usually not 
severe enough to be worth paying capital gains taxes to the government. That’s 
often the case in a raging bull market. You’ll see a double top that will take 
price down, but not far, only to see the stock recover quickly and soar to new 
highs. But it’s your money and selling near the top is better than selling near 
the bottom. 

Check others in the industry. If other stocks in the same industry are 
hurting along with yours, then sell your stock or consider shorting. This advice 
is especially useful if the general market is tumbling, too. 

Wait for trend change. With such a large price rise after the ultimate 
low (or from a busted pattern), consider buying then. The Sample Trade gives 
an example. 

Stop location. Table 33.7 shows various stop locations for double tops. 
Be sure to convert the potential loss into a percentage of the current price. 
If the value is too large (many use 8% as a maximum loss value), then either 
adjust the stop or abandon the trade. 

Busted trade. Table 33.9 discusses trading single busted patterns. I think 
that’s probably the best way to trade a double top. Unfortunately, it relies on 
a single busted pattern, and there’s no guarantee that the stock will bust only 


Trading Tactics 523 


once. Thus, it’s a risk, but the reward can fill your wallet or purse if you trade 
the pattern often enough and well enough. 

Tips. The tips I discussed in the chapter on Adam & Eve double tops 
apply to its twin, Eve. Let’s talk about them. In the first series of tips listed 
below, look for a strong push upward leading to the first top, not a trend that 
meanders and rollercoasters for months before forming the peak. 

When I write of a knot, Figure 31.5 (not Figure 33.5) shows an example of 
what I’m blabbering about. You'll see it at I, circled in the figure. Price moves 
sideways for at least 3 days with lots of price overlap. It’s in the line of trend 
leading up to the Adam peak, and it’s the closest support knot below confirma- 
tion. That’s the target. Price at A almost reaches that knot and reverses. 


¢ In your stock, look to the left where price trends up to the double top. 
If the stock at confirmation is resting on a knot of support, then don’t 
take the trade. Expect the stock to bounce off that knot and maybe bust 
the downward breakout. It’s too high risk to short the stock. 

¢ Look for the first knot of support below confirmation. The top of that 
knot is your price target. Price will often drop to the top of the knot 
right after a breakout and reverse there. It’s a good time and price to 
close out the trade. 

¢ If the knot of support is well down the price trend (such as when price 
makes a steep but long rise up to the double top), the stock likely won’t 
make it back down to the knot, at least not in the first few days. Meas- 
ure the move from the knot to the confirmation price and divide by 
three or maybe half and subtract it from the confirmation price. That’s 
your target. 


Figure 31.4 shows an example of this strong move up to the Adam 
peak. There’s no support area (no place where price goes horizontal 
for 3 or more days) along that run, so slice the height of the run in half 
or thirds and measure down that far from the confirmation price as 
your target. 


Sometimes price will bottom in an irregular fashion (before the first 
Eve peak) with several valleys touching an up-sloping trend. Connect 
those valleys with a trendline. That’s your target. This works with a 
loose-looking up-and-down movement that’s quite wavy but seems to 
bottom along the trendline. That trendline, extended into the future, is 
a support area where the stock will drop and reverse. This setup is rare, 
but I’ve seen price hit the trendline and reverse there. 


Table 33.11 shows special features for double tops. 

‘Top-to-top variation. Patterns in bull markets show better performance 
when the price variation between the highest high in each top is larger than the 
1% median. The difference between the two is large enough that you might 
want to pay attention to this idea. 


524 Double Tops, Eve & Eve 


Table 33.11 
Special Features 

Trading Tactic Performance 
Small top-to-top variation 14% 

Large variation 18% 

Median top-to-top variation 1% 

Lower left top 16% 

Lower right top 16% 


Lower top. I didn’t see any performance improvement in this measure. 
I checked to see if performance changed depending on which top of the double 
top was lower. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 33.5 shows the sample trade for Eve & Eve double tops. In a bull mar- 
ket, after a double top, price soars 60% after reaching the ultimate low (as I’ve 
mentioned). Even if you are late calling the turn, you can still make a profit. 
Consider the Eve & Eve double top shown in the figure. 


Family Dollar (Retail Store, NYSE, FDO) 
nT 

'_ 39 
- 38 
- 37 


36 


thy ml 
yi ‘ pat 
i i! 


Eve Eve cari ny “ae 


aren a New High 
i | 1 Ni i us) 


Confirmation Line 


en Ultimate - 26 
Low 


- 21 
02 Nov Dec Jan 03 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 33.5 Consider buying the stock once the decline completes. Sometimes, 
the resulting rise can be quite profitable. 


Sample Trade 525 


Before you trade this stock, ask yourself if it is an Eve & Eve double top. 
Running through the identification guidelines shown in Table 33.1, we find 
that the price rise leading to the pattern begins at A (far left, bottom). Both 
peaks look similar in that they are wide and made of several short spikes—all 
characteristic of Eve tops. The left peak is more pointed but wider than the 
right one, but they look like two rounded hills on the price landscape. 

The valley between the two peaks dips 14%, and the peaks top out at 
about the same price. The peak-to-peak separation measures 55 days or almost 
2 months. Volume is heavier on the right peak than the left. Finally, the decline 
to the confirmation line is a straight-line run; price does not form a third 
peak. In short, this is a valid double top when price closes below the confir- 
mation line. 

How do you trade it? For this trade, imagine that you do not own the 
stock, nor do you want to sell it short. The S&P 500 index reached a low in 
October 2002 and bounced, forming a higher low in early March, right when 
price was bottoming at B. Other stocks in the retail store industry were bot- 
toming at the same time or were completing a bottom retest (a higher low). 

What was clear after the March bottom was that everything started mov- 
ing up in tandem. The industry started recovering, as did the general market 
(a new bull run). A buy signal occurred when price closed above the down- 
sloping trendline. The high volume at B (a common bottom phenomenon) 
also suggested a bottom—panic selling. 

Additional evidence of a major turn comes from points A and B. Point A 
marks a major turning point for the stock; B, being a higher low, is a retest of 
that low. Since B did not drop below A, it is a bullish signal. 

If you missed the trendline signal and higher low at B, then a close above 
the double top would be another buy signal. With a 54% average rise for a 
single busted double top, you have plenty of time to buy. If you bought at the 
B low, you would have made 73%. Buying at the double top high would have 
made a profit of 36%. The stock topped out at 44.13, by the way, before tum- 
bling back to 32, near the double top high. 

Not all trades will work out as well as this one, and your timing has to 
be exquisite. A major bull run began after the October low, and the industry 
responded with large gains. Both helped propel the stock higher. A combina- 
tion of bullish factors is often what separates a winning trade from a losing one. 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Looks like a short rectangle bounded by two parallel (or nearly parallel) 
trendlines in a strong price trend (the flagpole). 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bullish Short-term bullish 
continuation continuation 
Breakeven failure rate 44% 29% 
Average rise 9% 10% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Percentage meeting 46% 53% 
price target 
See also Flags, High and Tight, Pennants; Rectangle Bottoms; 
Rectangle Tops 


526 


Tour 527 
Downward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish Short-term bearish 
continuation continuation 
Breakeven failure rate 45% 18% 
Average drop 8% 16% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Percentage meeting 46% 54% 


price target 


Small flags appear like roadkill along the price highway. You find them 
in a fast-moving price trend (flagpole), one that zips along for just a few 
days. Price pauses at the flag and then continues in the same direction as 
before encountering the flag (many times). That behavior is not always the 
case, of course, as price reversals abound, so you should wait for the break- 
out to be sure. 

The Results Snapshot shows the performance statistics. However, I don’t 
rank this pattern for performance because I don’t measure the move to the 
ultimate high or low like I do with traditional chart patterns. I measure the 
move to the trend end (the nearest minor high or low). 

The breakeven failure rates are large and get worse fast, but that’s 
expected; [’ll explain that in the Statistics section. The failure rates are not as 
important as how often price meets the measure rule target. 

In theory, flags work as half-staff patterns, meaning they appear midway 
in the price trend. The Snapshot says that works around half the time. A more 
accurate measure, using two pattern configurations, says the flag appears later 
in the price trend than midway except for one case (see Table 34.12). 


Tour 


Figure 34.1 shows a good example of a flag in a short-term downward price 
trend. The flag is bounded by two parallel trendlines and is no more than 
3 weeks long (often as short as a few days). 

You'll see flags appearing in strong uptrends or downtrends (such as 
that shown in the figure), sometimes near the halfway point of the move. 
This particular flag goes against the grain in the sense that price retraces the 
downtrend. This is the most common behavior—a retrace against the pre- 
vailing price trend—but it is not unusual for flags to appear horizontal (as 
short rectangles) or slope downward (following the trend). Since flags can also 
appear in uptrends, they usually retrace downward, but can be horizontal or 
tilt upward, too. 


528 Flags 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD) 
— 34 


- 33 
- 32 


Uh at! 
fa : 
| | | 29 
I I My! -28 
| il | “37 
! | | ! es 
Hl re, a 
h hh | ty = 
~22 
-21 
Iagt t - 20 
| it Hy! uy th pl -19 
-18 


-17 


- 16 
Jun 93 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


t ut) | 
| lar I Hh 


Figure 34.1 A flag bounded by two parallel trendlines usually has a receding 
volume pattern. 


Hughes Supply, Inc (Retail Building Supply, NYSE, HUG) 


| 
wut lh - 42 
! A = 40 
\ "4 Flag = 38 


02 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 03 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 34.2 Two flags in different price trends help gauge the move from A to B. 


Identification Guidelines 


Figure 34.2 shows two flags, the first one in a downward price trend and the 
second after price turns at the bottom. For both flags, the quick price move 
starts at their respective point As and finishes at their respective point Bs. 


Identification Guidelines 529 


In these two examples, the move after the flag is longer than the one before 
the flag, but that is usually not the case. The move after the flag completes is 
a key trait of this pattern. By using the length of the trend leading to the flag, 
you can gauge how far price will move after the breakout. 

Table 34.1 outlines the identification characteristics for flags. 

Appearance. ‘Iwo parallel trendlines bound the price action for flags 
as shown in Figure 34.3. However, the flagpole is an important part of the 


Table 34.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Flags must have a flagpole, a place where the stock goes nearly verti- 
cal and that leads to the flag. Price action bounded by two parallel 
trendlines becomes the flag. Price usually tilts against the prevailing 
trend: It rises in a downtrend and falls in an uptrend, but exceptions 
are common. 


Price These formations usually form near the midpoint of a steep, quick price 
trend, flagpole trend. If you do not have a flagpole, then ignore the flag. 
Volume Volume usually trends downward throughout the flag. Do not discard a 
flag because it has an unusual volume trend. 
Breakout Can be in any direction. 
direction 
Duration Flags are short, from a few days to 3 weeks. Formations longer than 3 


weeks are better classified as channels or rectangles. 


Georgia Gulf (Chemical (Basic), NYSE, GGC) 


rh -40 
| | lott, lh as 
ha 
4 


Jan 95 Feb Mar 


Figure 34.3 This flag appears about midway in a downtrend. 


530 Flags 


pattern. If you don’t have a flagpole, then I consider the flag invalid. You may 
decide otherwise. You may enjoy shooting yourself in the foot, too. 

Figure 34.2, for example, has a nice flagpole in the right (March) flag, 
starting at A. Price rises smartly in a brisk upward move. The left flag (August) 
I would probably discard because the 1-day price drop leading to the start 
of the flag isn’t long enough. Even so, the flag pattern is pretty, with a nice 
tight-looking upward retrace. 

Price trend, flagpole. Reliable flags appear during steep price trends 
(forming a flagpole). The trends might be up or down, but price rises or falls 
quickly, moving several points (depending on the price of the stock—it could 
be cents, not dollars) in just a few days to a few weeks. In Figure 34.3, for 
example, the flagpole begins on 18 January and the flag begins on 1 February. 
In that short time, price tumbles from a high of 40.75 to a low of 30.13. 

Notice how the price trend in the flag slopes upward. This behavior is 
typical for the prevailing price trend (that is, flags typically form against the 
trend, but not always). 

Volume. The volume trend nearly always recedes over the flag portion of 
the pattern. However, this is not an inviolate rule, but usually is the case. Don’t 
discard a flag because it has an unusual volume trend. 

Breakout direction. Price can break out in any direction, but expect it 
to follow the prevailing trend. I’ll discuss the breakout direction in Table 34.4. 

Duration. Flags are short compared to many other chart patterns. In the 
case of Figure 34.3, the flag is 12 trading days long. Many times when a flag is 
very short, such as 3 or 4 days, it appears as a horizontal rectangle—a dark blob 
in the middle of a fast price trend. You may want to clean your eyewear in case 
it’s a spot on the glass. 

I limited the length of flags in my study to 3 weeks, but that is an arbi- 
trary limit. 

When selecting a flag to trade, the most important guideline is the rapid, 
steep price trend (flagpole). If price is meandering up or down and forms a 
flag, then look elsewhere. The flag must be a place where the stock can take 
a breather from its rapid pace. Price moves against the short-term trend for 
several days before continuing on (or not). 


Focus on Failures 


Like all chart patterns, flags are not immune to failure. Figure 34.4 shows 
a flag failure. The flag, while obeying the confines of the two down-sloping 
trendlines, has a good volume trend. Price should continue higher after the 
flag completes but does not. Why? 

One explanation is that the flag is just too long at 26 days. Sometimes an 
excessively long flag suggests an impending failure or a weak price move (after 
the breakout). Trade flags more than 3 weeks long carefully or pass them up 


Focus on Failures 531 


Analog Devices Inc (Semiconductor, NYSE, ADI) 


| 


-31 
- 30 


i Mth, 
Pa . i M tee 


\n rn 2 


Hy 


ie 


Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May 
Figure 34.4 The failure of price to continue rising is probably due to two factors: 
The price rise leading to the flag is short, and the flag is longer than normal. 


Vulcan Materials (Cement & Aggregates, NYSE, ie 
| - 48 
hh | Mi v 

" ? J 


| - 46 
hha W 4 Mp: 
4 I, | mi \ h , 


iv } 


Trend Line - 40 
Support _ 39 


ur | f 


| 


Dome-Shaped 
Volume 


ADV 


U-Shaped 
Volume 


99 Oct Nov Dec Jan0O Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 34.5 The AB run is longer than CD, meaning that the measure rule fails in 
this example. Support beneath the flag stops the decline. 


entirely. In this example, the flag is not proportional to the flagpole, suggesting 
the need for caution trading it. 

Figure 34.5 shows a more common failure, one of performance. The 
decline in the February flag begins at A, 43, and ends at B, 38.90, for a run of 4.10. 


532 Flags 


The decline from C to D measures 3.06. If flags were true half-staff patterns, 
the two runs would be about equal. Since this is but one example, the Results 
Snapshot shows that only about half the flags hit their price targets. 

In this example, the flag has to chew through trendline support just 
beneath the flag. The dip is brief, as sometimes happens in trendline pierces, 
and price recovers only to surge upward, eventually making a new high. Also, 
the slide from A to B could be more robust (longer), like the down move lead- 
ing to the November flag. 

We'll see in Table 34.11 that when a flag tilts with the price trend (down- 
ward in this case in a downward price trend), performance suffers. And that’s 
what we see here with the ABCD pattern. 


Statistics 


Table 34.2 shows general statistics for flags. The performance statistics do not 
use the usual ultimate high or low method measure (that is, looking for a 20% 
trend change). Instead, I looked at the beginning and ending of the price trend 
(usually the nearest minor high or low after the breakout). Thus, comparing this 
pattern to other patterns except pennants (which use the same method) is unfair. 

Number found. I uncovered 1,278 flags (without really trying) in 462 
stocks with the first appearing in October 1991 and the most recent in Decem- 
ber 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. 
Many flags were just a few days long, and they are a colossal pain to catalog 
because they are so small and so plentiful. 


Table 34.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 573 148 384 173 


Reversal (R), con- 8% R, 92% C  8%R,92%C 31% R, 69% C 8% R, 92% C 
tinuation (C) 
occurrence 
Reversal, con- 6% R, 10% C + 8%R,10%C -5%R,-9% C -7% R, -17% C 
tinuation 
performance 
Average rise 9% 10% -8% -16% 
or decline 
Standard & Poor's 2% 2% -2% -5% 
500 change 
Days to trend 10 8 8 10 
high or low 


Statistics 533 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Most of the time, a flag 
acts as a continuation of the prevailing very short-term price trend. Flags in 
bull markets with downward breakouts see the most reversals, but continua- 
tions still outnumber reversals. 

Reversal/continuation performance. The best performance comes 
from flags in bear markets after downward breakouts that act as continuations. 
That means price is already dropping before the flag appears. 

Because a rising tide lifts all boats, I would expect to see continuation 
flags in bull markets with upward breakouts also do well. But they perform the 
same as in bear markets. Sigh. 

Average rise or decline. If you ignore how the pattern behaves (reversal 
or continuation) and measure the move from the breakout to the trend end, we 
see what I consider unusual results. Again, I’m looking for the general market 
to help performance, but I don’t see it (trade with the trend). That would apply 
to bull markets with upward breakouts (second to worst in performance) and 
bear markets with downward breakouts (perform best). 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Compare the general market rise or 
decline by the rise or decline after the flag breakout. Perhaps the large drop 
in the index in bear markets/down breakouts helped those flags outperform 
the others. 

Days to trend high or low. Because I’m looking for the trend end (and 
not the ultimate high or low), it’s a short time away. Notice that bull market/ 
up breakouts and bear market/down breakouts show slightly longer trends. 
Those two are the “trade with the trend” columns. The middle two columns 
are countertrend patterns. 

I removed Table 34.3 showing failure rates because they don’t apply to 
flags. Failure rates are a function of the move to the ultimate high or low and 
flags measure to the short-term trend end. 

Table 34.4 shows breakout-related statistics. You’ll notice that throw- 
backs and pullbacks do not appear in the table. That’s because they happen 
after the trend ends by definition and so don’t relate to the performance 
of the flag. 

Breakout direction. The table shows the breakout direction. A breakout 
occurs when price closes outside of the flag boundary. 

Yearly position, performance. Flags with breakouts near the yearly low 
perform best. Those near the yearly high perform worst, except after upward 
breakouts in bull markets. There, the middle third of the yearly price range is 
worst. Just remember that the performance for flags is the move to the trend 
end, not the ultimate high or low. 

Gaps. Only in bear markets after upward breakouts do gaps show a sig- 
nificant performance difference. A flag without a gap tends to perform better 
in most cases. 


534 Flags 
Table 34.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout 60% up 46% up 40% down 54% down 
direction 
Performance L 10%, L12%, L-9%, L-19%, 
of breakouts M 8%, M 10%, M -7%, M-14%, 
occurring near H9% H 9% H-5% H -7% 
the 12-month 
low (L), 
middle (M), 
or high (H) 
Performance 9% 8% -7% -15% 
with break- 
out day gap 
Performance 9% 11% -8% -16% 
without break- 
out day gap 
Average gap size $0.77 $0.56 $0.96 $0.98 


Table 34.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Height is a function of the flag portion of the pattern, not includ- 
ing the flagpole. I measured the height from the top of the flag to the bottom 
and divided by the breakout price. Flags taller than the median shown in the 
table outperformed in all cases. 

Width. Notice how narrow the median width is. Patterns wider than the 
median outperform in three of four columns, with bull markets/upward break- 
outs being the exception. Remember I put a limit of 21 days on flag length. 

Height and width combinations. Flags that are both tall and narrow 
do well in the “trade with the trend” columns (that is, bull market/up breakout 
and bear market/down breakout). They also show the larger performance dif- 
ferences. Pay attention to the worst-performing combinations when you trade. 
You'll want to avoid those. Clearly short flags suffer more than tall ones, but 
check the width, too. 

Table 34.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. In all cases volume trends downward most of the time. 
I used linear regression on volume from the start to end of the flag to deter- 
mine the trend. 

Rising/Falling volume, breakout day volume. As you scan across 
the rows and columns in the table, there is not a great deal of performance 


Statistics 535 


Table 34.5 
Size Statistics 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern 13% 12% -10% -22% 
performance 
Short pattern 5% 8% -5% -10% 
performance 
Median height as 4.3% 6.7% 4.4% 8.8% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 10% 10% -7% -15% 
performance 
Wide pattern 9% 11% -8% -18% 
performance 
Median width 9 days 9 days 10 days 8 days 
Short and narrow 6% 8% -6% -9% 
performance 
Short and wide 5% 8% -5% -12% 
performance 
Tall and wide 12% 13% -10% -21% 
performance 
Tall and narrow 15% 12% -10% -23% 
performance 
Table 34.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 74% down 74% down 77% down 73% down 
Rising vol- 9% 10% -8% -17% 
ume trend 
performance 
Falling vol- 10% 10% -8% -16% 
ume trend 
performance 
Heavy break- 8% 10% -7% -17% 
out volume 
performance 
Light break- 11% 11% -8% -15% 
out volume 


performance 


536 Flags 


difference between the numbers (vertically). For example, rising/falling vol- 
ume in bear markets after upward breakouts sees no performance difference. 
Light breakout volume sees a one-percentage-point difference, but that’s 
probably statistically insignificant. 

Table 34.7 is supposed to show how often price reaches a stop location. 
Because I measure the move from the breakout to the trend end (the next- 
nearest minor high or low), a straight-line run, the stop location will not trig- 
ger until after the trend ends. So I removed the table from this chapter. It’s not 
meaningful. 

Table 34.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. This measures the length of the trend after the 
breakout in bull markets only. Both breakout directions show the trend short- 
ening over time. It suggests failures will be higher. 

Table 34.9 is supposed to show busted pattern performance, but it 
doesn’t apply to flags, so it doesn’t appear in this chapter. 


Trading Tactics 


Consult Figure 34.6 as I review the tactics listed in Table 34.10. 

When trading flags, you must first be sure you have a valid formation. 
Use the identification guidelines outlined in Table 34.1 to ensure that you have 
correctly identified a flag, including the flagpole. 

Measure rule. The measure rule sets the expected price move. 

First, determine where the trend begins, which is usually the minor high 
(for downtrends) or low (for uptrends) preceding the flag (at the base of the 
flagpole). 

Figure 34.6 shows the flagpole beginning at point A, the start of the 
straight-line downhill run. Subtract the low at the flag start (point B at 42.75) 
from point A (47.50), giving a height of 4.75. Subtract the height from the high 
at the formation end (point C at 43) to give the target price of 38.25. Price 
reaches the target 13 trading days after it moves below the flag trendline. 

Notice that I’m calculating each leg using the longest length, from the 
high price at A to the low price at B and then the high at C to the target. So 
if the flag slopes in a different direction, you'll still know how to do the math. 


Table 34.8 
Performance Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 13% -11% 
2000s 11% 8% 


2010s 6% -6% 


Trading Tactics 537 


Table 34.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Calculate the price difference between the start of the trend (flagpole 
bottom) and the flag. Price should move at least this amount above 
(for uptrends) or below (for downtrends) the end of the flag. See text 
for details. 


Wait for As price moves outside the trendline boundary, place the trade. 
breakout 


How well does the measure rule work? Not very. The Results Snapshot 
at the beginning of this chapter shows the results in the “Percentage meeting 
price target” row. Success varies from 46% (bull markets) to 53% or 54% for 
bear markets. In other words, price reaches the target about half the time. 

Use the measure rule to gauge the amount of profit likely from the trade 
and weigh the amount of profit against the possible risk of failure. Look for 
support and resistance levels where price trends were repulsed in the past. 
Many times price will pause or turn around at these junctions. These values 
become the risk points for a trade. You can compare the risk with the reward 
by computing the current price with the measure rule target and the first or 
second level of support or resistance. Adjust the profit potential to use the 
anticipated entry price (the measure rule uses the top of the flag on the last day, 
but your entry price will use the bottom of the flag). 

For the stock shown in Figure 34.6, the target is 38.25 (as calculated 
above), but the entry price is the bottom of the flag, or 42.49 (a penny below 
the flag bottom) for a potential reward of 4.24 (that is, 42.49 — 38.25). The first 
resistance level is at 44, and there is another at 45 (assuming the trade goes 
against you and price rises). A stop placed at 44.13 or so, slightly above the first 
resistance level, works well. 

Wait for breakout. Take a position in the stock as it breaks out (as 
price moves outside the flag boundary). If you’re swing trading the flag, it’s 
important to get into the trade quickly because the potential gains are small. 
I would place an order to enter the trade at the flag trendline and monitor the 
trade closely. 

Once price nears the target, as predicted by the measure rule, consider 
closing out the trade. Since the statistics regarding the success of meeting the 
predicted price target are poor, be ready to close out the trade sooner than 
expected. If you wait for price to reach the target, you might turn a profitable 
trade into a losing one by holding too long. 

Table 34.11 shows how flag tilt affects performance. The flag in 
Figure 34.1 slopes upward (tilts upward). The flag in Figure 34.4 tilts 
downward. I found that when the flag tilts against the price trend, perfor- 
mance improves. 


538 Flags 


Table 34.11 
Flag Tilt 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tilt up, 6% 8% -8% -17% 
performance 
Tilt down, 10% 11% -6% -13% 
performance 
Table 34.12 
Special Features 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Rising price trend, upward breakout, downward flag tilt 
Flagpole days 15 12 
Breakout to trend end, days 12 10 
Flagpole price move 19% 24% 
Breakout to trend end, price move 17% 21% 
Time multiplier 44% 45% 
Price multiplier 47% 47% 
Falling price trend, downward breakout, upward flag tilt (below) 
Flagpole days 14 14 
Breakout to trend end, days 10 12 
Flagpole price move 13% 21% 
Breakout to trend end, price move 15% 26% 
Time multiplier 42% 46% 
Price multiplier 54% 55% 


For example, in a bull market after an upward breakout, if a flag tilts 
upward (following the upward price trend), the stock sees an average rise of 
6%. Flags that tilt against the upward trend see price rise 10%. Notice that 
upward breakouts do best with down-tilting flags and downward breakouts 
do best with up-tilting flags. Both cases do best when the flag tilts against the 
short-term price trend. 

Table 34.12 takes a magnifying glass to the move before and after the 
flag. For two continuation patterns (rising price trend with an upward break- 
out and a downward-tilting flag, and the reverse, falling price trend, downward 
breakout, and upward-tilting flag) I measured the price and time moves. 

Let’s talk about the bull market results for the first continuation pattern, 
and you can apply the same logic to bear markets and the second continua- 
tion pattern. 


Experience 539 


Time move. If we expect the flag to be in the middle of the trend, I found 
that’s not true. The flagpole averaged 15 days long, but the move from the 
breakout to trend end was 12 days long. So expect a quicker end to the move 
after the breakout. 

Price move. I measured the same two legs (flagpole move and flag break- 
out to trend end). I found that the flagpole saw price move 19%. After the 
breakout, price moved less, 17%. 

Multipliers. This item uses the results of the prior rows to figure out 
how much to multiply the flagpole to get a better estimate of how long and 
how far the stock might move. 

For example, suppose you see a flag with a flagpole height of $5 in a stock 
trading at $26. The flagpole is 5/26 or 19% of the current price. I know from 
the table that the average move after the flagpole ends is 17% along a com- 
bined height of 19% + 17% or 36% high. So 17/36 is 47%. 

If I take 47% of $5 and add it to the breakout price, I should get a better 
estimate of how far price might rise. If the breakout is at $25 (price retraced a 
dollar in the flag before breaking out upward), the target would be 25 + $5 x 
47% or 27.35. Clear as mud? 

How long will it take to reach the target? Say it took 11 days to rise to 
the top of the flagpole. The time multiplier is 12/(15 + 12) or 44%. So I'd take 
44% of 11 days (which is 5 days, rounded up) and that’s what I would add to 
the breakout date. If it’s a weekend, then you can use either Friday or Monday 
as the target. 


Experience 


I’ve entered trades a number of times using flags but few times have I traded it 
like a flag (using the measure rule as a target). Here’s what I learned. It assumes 
the flagpole is upward and flag tilt is downward. 


¢ After the flag becomes recognizable (like a week after the flagpole), 
place a buy order at the bottom of the flag. If the flag breaks out 
upward, you get in sooner than if you place a buy order at the top flag 
trendline or if you wait for a close above the flagpole high (either work, 
but you cut potential profit). I used this entry method a few times with 
success, but once the flag broke out downward and I suffered a loss. 
A downward breakout is a risk with this early entry mechanism. 

¢ Don’t wait for price to close above the top flag trendline and enter 
at the opening price the next day. Why? Because it’s too late. If a 
flag works like it’s supposed to (which is rare), when price breaks out 
upward, it starts a strong push upward. So waiting a day means you 
could be halfway to the target. So use a buy stop a penny above the top 
flag trendline (or at another location, as discussed above). 


540 Flags 


Place a sell order at the target. With short-term trades, such as with 
flags, the stock could hit the measure rule target and then drop there- 
after (I’ve seen that a lot). If you have an order to sell waiting at or 
near the target, you can get out on time. I had one flag trade where 
it reached the measure rule target (one of the few), but I didn’t sell 
until the next day and gave back too much profit. The stock continued 
lower, too. 

¢ It will be rare for the stock to reach the target before a significant 
retrace. Many of the flags I looked at didn’t follow through with a 
straight-line push higher to the target. They meandered higher instead. 


If price breaks out upward rising from the flag but then closes below 
the bottom of the flag, sell. The stock will likely continue lower. I had 
that happen twice and lost money after the reversal. Keep the stop tight 
after an upward breakout. 


Plan for the stock to miss the measure rule target. I see this often in 
flags. Of course, the Results Snapshot says price will reach the tar- 
get only 46% of the time in bull markets, where I like to use flags. 
‘Try computing the measure rule target but use something like 75% 
of the flagpole height projected upward to get a more conservative 
(closer) target. 


Sample Trade 


Let us say you are considering shorting the stock shown in Figure 34.6. Since 
the price trend is downward in a bull market, the Results Snapshot says that 
46% of the flags will meet their price targets on average. That is a poor show- 
ing and deserves caution. 

As the flag forms, you monitor the price closely by not only charting the 
end-of-day price but also checking it midday. When you dial into your broker 
for a lunchtime price quote and discover that price has moved outside the bot- 
tom trendline, you decide to pull the trigger. You sell short and receive a fill at 
42 (most of the way down price bar C), just above the closing price of 41.50. 
(Note: An order to enter the trade a penny below the flag low, 42.49, would 
have worked well in this situation, but sometimes setting the entry price can be 
difficult if the flag is loose-looking). 

You follow the stock closely as price declines. Looking back through the 
prior year’s trading history, you discover two support levels at about 40 and 
39. You believe that the stock will fall through the first support level but the 
second one may be more difficult. It is, after all, closer to the 38.25 target price 
and more robust than the first level. 

When the stock moves sideways at the first support level, you check your 
work and reexamine the fundamentals and technical indicators. Everything 
seems good, so you remain in the trade. 


Sample Trade 541 


Murphy Oil Corp (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, MUR) 
A 
[nthe _47 
hy 


tH 1 My 45 
Ta = = 
‘Heal La First " | 

i Resistance 


Level 
B— Ie TT 


ll Tht | -40 
Prior Support —— - fly ili | 


Target Price —— ‘yt 


Sep 93 Oct Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb 


Figure 34.6 Use the measure rule to gauge the decline in this stock. Take the 
difference between the prior minor high (point A) to the formation low at the start 
(point B). Subtract the height from the high at the formation end (point C), and 
the result is the target. 


Eventually the stock pierces the first support level and declines to the sec- 
ond one, where it gets stuck. It closes at 39 but the next day moves up. So the 
following day you decide to close out your position, believing that the risk 
of a price rise far exceeds the possible gain. Your short sale covers at 39, and 
you receive almost $3 a share. That is not a bad profit for a hold time of just 
2 weeks. On an annualized basis, the return is . .. wonderful! 


35 


Flags, High and Tight 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: After a stock doubles in price, a consolidation region of several days to 
several weeks long appears, followed by an upward breakout. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bullish Short-term bullish 
continuation continuation 
Performance rank 30 out of 39 15 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 15% 20% 
Average rise 39% 25% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
‘Throwbacks 67% 68% 
Percentage meeting 82% 78% 
price target 
See also Flags, pennants 


It seems that as soon as the second edition of this book came out and 
proclaimed that the high, tight flag was the best performing chart pattern in 
both bull and bear markets, the chart pattern stopped working. Now, per- 
formance ranks near the bottom of the list: 30 out of 39, where 1 is best 
(bull market). 


542 


Tour 543 


I noticed the performance decline but suffered through losses until I 
figured out this pattern didn’t work. Pd see price climb 10% to 15% after a 
breakout and then collapse. After a bear market, I’d see price double, form the 
flag pattern, and either die right then or rise by the same 10% or 15% before 
collapsing. 

During the Covid-19 pandemic of 2020, we saw the same behavior. 
I warned readers of my blog not to trade this pattern. And I was right. I think 
I saw one flag perform as expected, but dozens of others failed. 

Let’s take a tour to see what the pattern looks like. 


Tour 


Figure 35.1 shows a classic example of a high, tight flag. The quick rise from 
the low point at 14 to the flag high at 30.75 took less than 2 months. The 
volume trend was downward throughout the chart pattern. After a slight pause, 
the stock continued rising. In another 2 months, it reached a peak of 120. 
That’s the way the pattern used to work in the glory days of the 1990s. 

The high, tight flag is a momentum play (buy high, sell higher). When 
a stock doubles in a short time, it usually takes a breather and consolidates. 
When it does, it gives the trader the opportunity to buy the stock before the 
rise resumes. How do you correctly identify a high, tight flag? 


Diana Corp (Telecom. Services, NYSE, DNA) 


? 542 
Tight Flag i] li 36 
L tyler 

ost 


Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 35.1 A high, tight flag that sees price rise from about 30 to 120 in 
2 months. 


544 Flags, High and Tight 


Identification Guidelines 


The phrase, high, tight flag, is a misnomer because the pattern usually does not 
resemble a flag at all. Sometimes price moves up slightly as the flag progresses, 
such as shown in Figure 35.1, but more often price spikes down briefly (a day 
or two), then returns and moves downward or horizontally before breaking out 
and heading up. 

William J. O’Neil popularized the pattern in his book, How to Make Money 
in Stocks (McGraw-Hill, 1988). In his introduction to the pattern, he identifies 
many characteristics that high, tight flags share. 

Briefly, O’Neil looked for a doubling of the stock price in less than 
2 months, a sideways move of 3 to 5 weeks during creation of the flag, with 
price drifting down no more than 20% in the flag. The guidelines eliminated 
many patterns so that fewer than 10% (of the ones I looked at) qualified. I fol- 
lowed none of his guidelines. I prefer to let the pattern tell me how it behaves. 

I programmed my computer to identify all stocks that had a minimum 
price rise of 100% in 2 months or less. Then I manually went through each 
stock and looked for a nearby consolidation region. If the region was close to 
the 100% price gain, then I accepted it as a high, tight flag. 

For example, the figure passes all the O’Neil guidelines, whereas 
Figure 35.2 does not (if you apply them strictly). The stock reaches a low of 
5.25 in early July (L) then starts moving up. In early September, it reaches a 
price of 10.25, just shy of doubling. Admittedly, the 95% price gain is less than 
a strict interpretation of the O’Neil guidelines, but it comes close. 


Amdahl Corp (Computers & Peripherals, ASE, AMH) 13 


My 
| 7 11 


'_10 


ily 


, Tight il I Thy 


ae ‘uth 
{| I} atta, 
ul | | 


Ip 


ul eh (! 
Hyg liy il Mutt 


1 3 
Jun 94 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb 


Figure 35.2 This high, tight flag looks loose, but price performs well, rising 33% 
above the highest high in early September. 


Identification Guidelines 545 


Table 35.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A rise lasting no more than 2 months carries price upward at least 90% 
(shoot for a doubling of the stock price). This is the flagpole. Price 
pauses and consolidates when building the flag portion and then 
breaks out upward. 


Flag Locate a consolidation area after the flagpole, where price pauses. This 
consolidation is the flag. 
Volume The volume trend in the flag should be receding for best performance. 
Breakout Upward. Don’t trade this if price fails to close above the flag/ 
direction flagpole high. 
Duration Price has to double or near double in 2 months or less. 


The high, tight flag slopes downward for 38 days, 3 more days than the 
maximum, and declines by 22%, two percentage points over the threshold. 
You could argue that the numbers are close enough to the O’Neil guidelines 
to qualify as a high, tight flag. I accept it as a valid pattern. The stock climbed 
28% before dropping by 20%. 

Table 35.1 shows the guidelines I used in selecting and evaluating high, 
tight flags. 

Appearance. Look for a short, quick rise. By that, I mean a rise in which 
price nearly doubles in 2 months or less. It can move up more than that, and 
the rise need not take place from a flat base (horizontal price movement). In 
the high, tight flags I found, I looked for a doubling of the price in 2 months 
and then let my computer determine when the trend started (see “Trend Start” 
in the Glossary for details). 

You will want to avoid price trends where the trend in the month or 
two leading to the start of the flagpole is steep (either up or down). Shallow 
inbound trends are best. I'll discuss this in the Experience section. 

Flag consolidation. Once we have a tall flagpole (a doubling of price in 
two months or less), look for a consolidation area to form. In my selections, 
I did not care how long the stock consolidated nor how far the flag descended 
before turning upward. All that mattered was that the consolidation area was 
plainly visible to the casual observer. 

Volume. The final identification guideline is not really for identification 
as much as it is for performance. Flags with receding volume outperform those 
without. However, I would not ignore a high, tight flag simply because volume 
is rising. Rather, I would recognize that performance may suffer. 

Breakout direction. The breakout is upward by definition. If the stock 
breaks out of the flag (consolidation area) downward, then look elsewhere. I prefer 
to wait for price to close above the top of the flagpole before taking a position. 

Duration. Price must double in 2 months or less. That doubling becomes 
the flagpole. 


546 Flags, High and Tight 


Tesoro Petroleum (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, TSO) 


-13 
Il | -12 
} Kt" . by alt lh 
ll ) | | r 7 Ht] | [shy = 
| | Wists | = 
| h ih lJ Ms "| \, -10 
et [' | 


Throwback [F 9 


| 
| 


yr =7 


Tan 
Napfln._t I! Haart 


Jan 94 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 35.3 A failure of a high, tight flag. Price fails to continue moving up very 
far before heading down in failure. 


Focus on Failures 


Investing in a stock showing a high, tight flag is not without risk. Figure 35.3 
shows a quick, nearly vertical rise (the flagpole), leading to creation of the flag. 
As the rise falters, high volume tapers off. When price heads lower in the flag 
portion of the pattern (marked in this case by two down-sloping trendlines), 
volume recedes. That’s how it should be in well-behaved patterns. 

The flag drifts lower for almost a month before price breaks out of the 
trend and resumes rising. After climbing for just over a week to a new high, 
the stock curls around and meanders lower. It throws back to near the base 
of the flag and then moves horizontally for several months before dropping 
lower again. 

The figure shows a flag that suffers from a small rise, and it’s typical of this 
pattern’s failure. After price breaks out of the flag upward, it is supposed to dou- 
ble again. However, in this case, price stops rising just above the flagpole high. 

In my analysis of this pattern, I found that 38% will fail in this manner. 
However, a bunch of potential high, tight flags never get this far. The second 
type of failure for this pattern is the failure to break out upward. As I men- 
tioned, I see that a lot. It’s why I suggest traders not only wait for price to close 
above the flag, but to close above the flagpole, too. 


Statistics 


Table 35.2 shows general statistics. 


Statistics 547 


Table 35.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,028 394 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% C 100% C 
Average rise 39% 25% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 5% 1% 
Days to ultimate high 43 25 
How many change trend? 55% 42% 


Number found. I found 1,422 high, tight flags in 578 stocks with the 
first pattern appearing in February 1991 and the most recent December 2019. 
Note that I did not log the Covid-19 failures in this edition because some 
haven’t reached the ultimate high yet. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Since I was looking for an 
upward breakout (only) after a sharp price rise (the flagpole), each flag acted as 
a continuation of the prevailing price trend. 

Average rise. The average rise measured from the breakout price (often 
it’s the opening price the day after price closed above the flagpole high) to the 
ultimate high. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The S&P climbed a bit as measured 
from the high, tight flag’s breakout day to the date of the ultimate high. 
Notice that a strong market uptrend tends to push price higher (that is, the 
average rise is higher in bull markets than bear markets). If you’re starving 
for clichés, then I have two: A rising tide lifts all boats and trade with the 
(market) trend. 

Days to ultimate high. High, tight flags are rockets, reaching the ulti- 
mate high in about a month to 6 weeks on average. The median is just 18 days. 
That’s fast. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many flags see price 
rise more than 20% after the breakout. I consider values more than 50% to be 
good, but 55% is the average for all bullish chart patterns. Bear markets fall 
short of the average made by all other chart pattern types (which see 46% ris- 
ing more than 20%). 

Table 35.3 shows failure rates for high, tight flags. I found that 15% of 
the patterns will fail to see price rise more than 5% after a bull market break- 
out. Over a third (38%) will fail to see price rise more than 15%. This is the kill 
zone, a rise of 10% to 15% where I’ve noticed a lot of the patterns die. 

Table 35.4 shows breakout-related statistics for flags. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is always upward. If 
price closes below the bottom of the flag, then that’s a downward breakout. 
Ignore the pattern. It’s a high, tight flag that’s failed. 


548 Flags, High and Tight 


Table 35.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 155 or 15% 77 or 20% 
10 129 or 28% 66 or 36% 
15 108 or 38% 45 or 48% 
20 75 or 45% 39 or 58% 
25 72 or 52% 32 or 66% 
30 56 or 58% 22 or 71% 
35 54 or 63% 22 or 77% 
50 119 or 75% 39 or 87% 
75 129 or 87% 34 or 95% 
Over 75 131 or 100% 18 or 100% 
Table 35.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 100% up 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


Throwbacks occurrence 

Average time to throwback peaks 

Average time to throwback ends 

Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 


Performance with breakout day gap 
Performance without breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


Yearly position, performance. Where in the yearly price range do the 
best performing flags reside? Those patterns with breakouts within a third of 
the yearly high tend to perform best in both bull and bear markets. Avoid flags 


L 40%, M 28%, 
H 43% 


67% 

11% in 6 days 
11 days 

35% 

47% 

52% 


39% 
38% 
$0.60 


L 27%, M 20%, 
H 27% 


68% 

12% in 6 days 
12 days 

22% 

29% 

39% 


28% 
24% 
$0.68 


with breakouts in the middle third of the yearly high-low range. 


Throwbacks. Throwbacks occur over two-thirds of the time and take 
between 11 and 12 days, on average, to return to the breakout price. When a 
throwback occurs, performance suffers (which is typical for many other chart 


pattern types, too). 


Statistics 549 


After a throwback completes, price resumes rising between 39% and 52% 
of the time. Those results don’t exactly inspire confidence that price will make 
a determined push higher. 

Gaps. A gap that appears on the day of breakout helps performance. 
In bull markets, the extra push is only one percentage point, but in bear mar- 
kets, the performance difference is wider: four percentage points. Because 
I tabulate performance using the opening price the day after a gap appears, you 
can participate in the performance by buying the stock after the gap. 

Table 35.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. There’s not a substantial performance difference between short 
or tall flag patterns. Height, in this case, does not include the flagpole. It’s just 
a measure of the high—low range of the flag. 

Width. Width measures from the start of the flagpole (the trend start) to 
the end of the flag. In both markets, wide patterns do better than short ones. 
I used the median length as the separator between narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. I looked at the combinations of height 
and width and found no consistent trend from bull to bear markets except that 
tall and narrow patterns performed worst. You'll want to avoid those. 

Table 35.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most often (more than 80% of 
the time). That’s probably because volume tends to spike during the creation 
of the flagpole and diminishes in the flag. 

Rising/Falling volume, breakout day volume. Again, there’s no con- 
sistent performance difference between bull and bear markets. However, the 
performance differences per market can be wide enough that you'll want to 
pay attention to rising/falling volume or heavy/light breakout day volume in 
each market (bull or bear). 


Table 35.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 38% 25% 
Short pattern performance 39% 25% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 14.8% 15.7% 
Narrow pattern performance 36% 23% 
Wide pattern performance 41% 26% 
Median width 60 days 55 days 
Short and narrow performance 37% 24% 
Short and wide performance 42% 26% 
Tall and wide performance 40% 27% 


Tall and narrow performance 35% 22% 


550 ‘Flags, High and Tight 


Table 35.6 
Volume Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 84% down 80% down 
Rising volume trend performance 35% 27% 
Falling volume trend performance 39% 24% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 37% 26% 
Light breakout volume performance 42% 21% 

Table 35.7 


How Often Stops Hit 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 65% 64% 
Middle 0% 0% 
Pattern bottom 0% 0% 
Flag low 5% 3% 

Table 35.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 43% 
2000s 37% 
2010s 33% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 14% 
2000s 14% 
2010s 21% 


For example, in bull markets, patterns with falling volume and light 


breakout day volume do better than the other combinations. 


Table 35.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. Because the 
stock doubles in the flagpole, you probably won’t see price make it back down 
to the middle or the bottom of the flagpole (I’m using the entire height of the 


pattern here, from start of the flagpole to flag end). 


I did measure how often price touched the bottom of the flag, and the 
table shows the results. The flag is a good place to hide a stop-loss order, pro- 


viding it’s not too far away from the entry price. 


Table 35.8 shows the performance over three decades. 


Trading Tactics 551 


Table 35.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the rise leading to the flag and project half of it upward, using 
the flag low price. The bottom portion of the table shows how often 
the measure rule works. 


Flagpole top Wait for price to close above the top of the pattern (often the flagpole). 
Stop location Below the bottom of the flag works well. See Table 35.7. 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 82% 78% 
Percentage reaching full height target 44% 29% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 12% 6% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 5% 1% 


Performance over time. This shows how pattern performance has 
deteriorated over time. It performed much better in the 1990s than it did in 
the 2010s. 

Failures over time. Failure rates were constant for 2 decades but rose by 
50% (from 14% to 21%) in the 2010s. 

I did not include Table 35.9 because the pattern is too tall to bust (too 
few samples). 


Trading Tactics 


Table 35.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to predict a target price. 
To calculate the price target, find where the trend starts (the bottom of the 
flagpole) and measure the price change from the low at the start to the highest 
high in the pattern, often the top of the flagpole. Divide the result in half and 
add it to the flag’s low price. The result is the target. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often various heights used 
in the computation work. Using half the pattern’s height (as suggested above), 
we see the measure rule works between 78% and 82% of the time. Using 
taller heights means a lower success rate but more potential profit if price 
rises that far. 

Flagpole top. I highly recommend you wait for price to close above 
the top of the flagpole (top of the pattern, really). Why? Because I’ve seen 
too many patterns where price breaks out upward from the flag and reverses 
before reaching the flagpole top. You want to give price every opportunity to 
reach a new high, so wait for the stock to clear the top of the pattern. 


552 Flags, High and Tight 


Stop location. The bottom of the flag makes for a delicious stop loca- 
tion. See Table 35.7 for details. 


Experience 


No single failure type stands out in my trades. However, I did notice that the 
pattern failed to live up to expectations, that of price doubling after the break- 
out. In several trades, I saw price climb by 20% (or less), reverse, and make a 
substantial decline. 


¢ Lesson: Don’t expect price to double after the breakout. 


I was stopped out of several trades by entering before price closed above 
the top of the flagpole (that is, price left the flag boundary but reversed before 
closing above the flagpole top). I learned to wait for a better entry, a close 
above the flagpole high. 


¢ Lesson: Wait for price to close above the top of the pattern and then buy. 


With other trades, I made a good entry and the pattern just didn’t deliver. 
However, I did have success with one, and I wrote an article about it (a trade 
in Insteel Industries (IIIN)). The stock climbed smartly after the breakout and 
paused along the way upward. I thought the uptrend was about to end, so I 
sold my position for a 28% gain. If I had hung in there, I’d have made (best 
case) 93%, or almost double my money. That would have been a perfect trade, 
and so you can see what the difference is between a perfect trade and real- 
world results. 

I researched how the pattern behaved as we came out of the 2009 bear 
market. Stocks doubled in price, and that’s as far as they got. Now, in mid- 
2020, I see the same pattern. I see dozens of high, tight flags where price has 
doubled from the March 2020 low, which are now failing to climb. With some, 
it’s too soon to see where the ultimate high is. With others, price rises by a few 
percent and then collapses. 


¢ Lesson: After bear markets, you'll see lots of high, tight flags that fail to 
breakout upward, or if they do, the rise is meager. 


I conducted a study of the slope of the inbound price trend in the month 
or two before the start of the high, tight flag. I found that if the slope was 
shallow, either up or down, performance was good. If the inbound trend 
over that month or two was steep, either steep up or steep down, then per- 
formance was bad. The best combination was a shallow drop over 1 month 
leading to the start of the flagpole. In second place, just one percentage point 


Sample Trade 553 


behind in performance, was a 1-month shallow up move leading to the start of 
the flagpole. 

In other words, a shallow inbound price trend leading to the bottom of 
the flagpole is good. You'll want to avoid steep inbound price trends. What 
we’re seeing now in the markets after a steep plunge in the market indices 
is many high, tight flags that fail to perform as expected. They have a steep 
inbound price trend. 


¢ Lesson: Avoid trading a high, tight flag that has a steep inbound price 
trend leading to the start of the flagpole. A shallow drop of 1 month 
leading to the start of the flagpole is best. 


Sample Trade 


When John spotted the high, tight flag shown in Figure 35.4, he wasted no 
time in taking a position, buying when price pierced the upper trendline at 
point A. He placed a stop 13 cents below the formation low at 5.63. Two days 
later, he was stopped out. 

“A billion here, a billion there, and pretty soon you're talking real 
money!” he said. 


Fairchild Corporation A (Industrial Services, NYSE, FA) 


roi 
a - 
“_r Me 14 
Ht - 13 
rt tt vA 
pe 4 pt Sold ~ 12 
Top 2 IM Sell ee 
Top 1 P elling 10 
fi rh | Trend Line 
fh, tht = 
| in r Fi ral 9 
Hsin! I Wt, a }" , 
Bonigat Pee rane Top 7 
Confirmation Line - 7 


MN 
i! 
| jee Actual Breakout = 6 


Ky ‘ Potential Breakout Day =P ae 


- 4 
n 


WT. ah Oo 8 


Sep Dec Jan 96 a8 Mar un Jul 


Figure 35.4 A high, tight flag with price stair-stepping higher. How do you trade 
this high, tight flag? 


554 Flags, High and Tight 


He backed off for a few days and waited for the stock to climb above the 
flagpole top (6.50). When it did, he piled into the stock again at 6.50. He con- 
sidered the bottom of the flag a support area, so that is the price he used as 
his stop loss. This time, however, he used a mental stop, one that is not placed 
with a broker but kept in his head. There is really no problem with a mental 
stop, providing an investor or trader is willing to sell should price hit the stop. 

Now and again, John looked at the price chart just to see how the trade 
was doing. The stock climbed to a support zone at 8 and went horizontal for 
3 months. Toward the end of that time, he raised his mental stop to 7.75. 

The stock climbed again. It ignored the double top formed by peaks in 
early January and late February, and so did John. By April the stock posted a 
new high, quietly disclosing that the double top turned out to be false (it never 
confirmed as a valid chart pattern). 

“When the stock passed $13 in mid-April, I started to pay attention. 
It reached 13.25 and backed off for a bit, sinking to a low of 11.13. Then it 
spurted up again. I drew a trendline upward following the latest move and 
when price pierced the line, I got my broker on the blower.” John sold at 13.63, 
not close to the high of 15.88, but “close enough for government work.” After 
commissions, he made 108% in slightly less than 8 months. 


36 


Gaps 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A price gap appears when the current low is higher than the prior high or 
the current high is below the prior low. 


Upward Gaps, Close within a Week 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Area gap 85% 92% 
Breakaway gap 1% 8% 
Continuation gap 8% 20% 
Exhaustion gap 60% 75% 


Downward Gaps, Close within a Week 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Area gap 90% 88% 
Breakaway gap 1% 0% 
Continuation gap 15% 17% 
Exhaustion gap 66% 63% 


There are six types of gaps, four of which I review in this chapter. The ex- 
dividend gap is not considered because it rarely has any investment significance. 
The ex-dividend gap usually occurs in utility stocks or stocks with high-paying 


555 


556 Gaps 


dividends. On the day of dividend distribution, the price sometimes moves 
downward, leaving a gap on the price chart. Even though the price of the stock 
after distribution is reduced by the dividend amount, the day’s trading range 
often fills the gap so no actual gap appears on the chart. 

The opening gap happens nearly all of the time on intraday stock charts. 
It is the gap between yesterday’s close and today’s open. If the gap remains 
open throughout the day, it can form one of the other gap types (area, breaka- 
way, and so on). 

For end-of-day traders, opening gaps don’t have much significance. For 
intraday traders, opening gaps give a day trader the opportunity to make a lot 
of money quickly, often by fading the gap. For more details, read my book, 
Evolution of a trader: Swing and Day Trading (Wiley, 2013). 

In the above Results Snapshot, I show how often the various gap types 
close within a week. I sorted it not by the breakout direction, but by whether 
price gaps up or down. 

I define closing the gap to be when price returns and spans (covers) the gap 
completely. The area gap closes quickest, with 85% to 92% of those gaps clos- 
ing within a week (depending on the bull or bear market). At the other end of 
the scale, we find breakaway gaps rarely (usually 1%) close within a week. In 
the middle are exhaustion gaps (which close the gap quickly) and continuation 
gaps (which usually stay open longer than a week). 


Tour 


Price gaps upward when yesterday’s daily high is below today’s low price. Price 
gaps downward when yesterday’s low is above today’s high. In both cases, some 
type of exuberance is driving the stock to create a gap (provided the stock 
is not thinly traded). Sometimes a gap is nothing more than the stock being 
worth less simply because of a dividend distribution. At other times, the reper- 
cussions are more severe. An earnings surprise, either positive or negative, can 
cause a gap and the stock to rise by 10% or 15% or to decline by 30% or more, 
depending on the severity of the news. 

Figure 36.1 shows a plethora of different gap types. Area gaps occur in 
congestion zones, often when price is moving sideways. Price gaps up or down, 
and the gap closes quickly. Of all the gap types, area gaps are common, like 
potholes on a dirt road. 

Breakaway gaps appear at the start of trends. They, too, are quite numer- 
ous, and high volume accompanies them. Usually there is some fundamental 
event driving the stock, creating a breakaway gap. 

Continuation gaps are relatively rare because they appear in the middle 
of strong trends. Those trends themselves do not occur very often and even 
less often do they contain a gap. 


Identification Guidelines 557 


Acuson Corp (Medical Supplies, NYSE, ACN) 


| -21 
| if Ny Breakaway ~ 20 
{t | e / -19 
Exhaustion I 
| a -18 


Continuation | | 


-17 
Area Breakaway I Ny I 
Gap f I | | -16 
yf " | Continuation 
| fr" -15 
Area 1 ! aul “hiyt! ta, i 
Gap ( if ‘ al Hunt alt or 
I 
} | | Uptrend -13 
i A 
-11 
-10 
Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 36.1 Plenty of gaps appear in a daily price chart. The most numerous are 
the area gaps. 


Exhaustion gaps signal the end of trends. They are the last jump up or 
down before the trend either reverses or moves sideways. After an exhaustion 
gap, price can suffer a violent reversal. So if you don’t exit a trade quickly, you 
may find profit dwindling. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 36.1 lists identification guidelines for gaps. 

Area gaps. Area, common, or pattern gaps are all names for the same type 
of gap. The gap forms inside or just after a consolidation region. It is easy to 
spot because price seems to hook around and closes the gap in less than a week 
(many times in the next trading session or two). Figure 36.2 shows many exam- 
ples of this hook feature: For example, you can see (if you have a magnifying 
glass) in late March that price gaps down and the next day the high closes the 
area gap. A quick hook such as that is characteristic of area gaps. Usually, few 
or no new highs (for uptrends) or lows (when price gaps lower) occur imme- 
diately after the gap. 

Volume may be high on the day price gaps but usually settles down 
quickly. You can see this behavior in late January. Volume spikes on the gap 
day, then returns to normal the next day. 

Breakaway gap. Breakaway gaps highlight the start of a new trend. 
Volume rises substantially above the prior day and price gaps upward and 


558 Gaps 


Table 36.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Area, common, or Occurs in areas of congestion (trendless markets) and closes rapidly. 
pattern gap Volume on the day of the gap may be high but returns to normal 
in a day or two. Few new highs (uptrends) or lows (in downtrends) 
occur after the gap. A distinctive curl as the gap closes is a key indi- 
cation of this gap type. 


Breakaway gap Identifies the start of a new trend and usually occurs after breaking 
out from a consolidation region. Is accompanied by high volume 
on the day of the gap, which continues for several days. The trend 
continues long enough for several new highs (for uptrends) or new 
lows (downtrends) to occur after the gap. 


Continuation, Happens in the midst of a straight-line advance or decline. Price 
measuring, or continues making new highs or lows without filling the gap. Volume 
runaway gap is usually high, propelling price in the direction of the trend. 


Ex-dividend gap Is triggered by a dividend distribution. Price moves down by the 
amount of the dividend, and a gap appears if the day’s trading 
range does not close it. 


Exhaustion gap Occurs at the end of a trend on high volume. The gap is not followed 
by many new highs or lows, and the gap itself may be unusually 
tall. After the gap, price enters a consolidation region or reverses. 
Commonly occurs after a continuation gap. The gap closes quickly, 
usually within a week. 


Opening gap Either partial or full. The gap appears on intraday charts when the 
opening price gaps away from the prior closing price. Usually 
closes by day’s end (72% do). Full opening gaps have no over- 
lap with the prior day’s price bar (that is, comparing the prior 
day’s close to the current opening price). Partial gaps open above 
or below the close, but are still inside the prior day’s high-low 
price range. 


continues rising (or falling in the case of a descending price gap), forming new 
highs (or lows). 

Consider the breakaway gap in early April shown in Figure 36.2. You 
can see price gap away from a congestion region and price continues rising for 
several days, accompanied by rising volume. 

The large breakaway gap in mid-April, accompanied by a high volume 
spike, is not an exhaustion gap because price continues rising. 

Price moves sideways starting after the peak in April and continuing into 
June before a breakaway gap sends price lower. The gap, along with the one 
in April, leaves behind an island reversal chart pattern. Both gaps that set off 
the island reversal occur on high volume and are probably event driven (some 
news happened, but that’s just a guess). Usually tall gaps are associated with 
exhaustion gaps, but price continues moving lower in the June case, so the gap 
is a breakaway gap. 


Identification Guidelines 559 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD) 


lh, 2 
Ic Hay ih ~31 
Island ——_ ontinuation i! 

Reversal I ll Int i My ae 


Lae Breakaway 


\, 
Area i I th army Exhaustion iy 


NXg i 
a) | 
Area fi i \ 


I 
| | | Breakaway _22 
\ ul 91 
| 
Area -20 


“Tha it ay Breakaway 


iz 1 h i ae 


a4 


Continuation 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 36.2 Various gap types with area gaps illustrating the hook feature. 
Volume pattern and position within the trend are the main ingredients to correctly 
identifying the different gap types. 


Continuation gaps. Continuation gaps occur along a strong price trend. 
They do not happen often since it takes a sharp rise followed by a gap and a 
continued rise in the stock (the reverse for downtrends, too). 

In Figure 36.2, you can see several continuation gaps in August when 
price zooms from a low of 23.50 to 32.63 in about 2 weeks. The gaps appear in 
the quick, sharp price rise on high, but not unusually high, volume. The quick 
rise forms new highs and the gap remains open (compare these continuation 
gaps with how quickly area gaps close). Of course, in a downtrend, price gaps 
downward and forms new lows. 

Ex-dividend gaps. An ex-dividend gap appears on the price chart when 
a dividend-paying stock distributes the dividend. Usually, however, the day’s 
trading range will cover the gap. 

Exhaustion gaps. Exhaustion gaps commonly follow continuation gaps, 
but there are lots of exceptions. Excessively tall gaps are most likely exhaus- 
tion gaps when they appear near the end of a trend. An exhaustion gap appears 
on the chart in September. The gap appears at the end of a downward move 
and closes quickly, which is typical for exhaustion gaps. Notice how a violent 
reversal occurs after the gap completes. Price rises from a low of about 26 to 
almost 31 in a few weeks. 

Most exhaustion gaps occur on high volume; it is like the last gasp before 
price ends the trend. You can see in the figure that the exhaustion gap has high 
volume. Volume spikes upward even as price descends, then volume recedes 


560 Gaps 


but remains high for several days after the gap. The high volume highlights the 
struggle of investors who want to purchase the stock at a good price with those 
who are trying to get out of the situation at the best offer. 

Opening gap. This gap type comes in two varieties, full and partial, 
which describes if the gap ventures outside of the prior day’s high-low trading 
range (full) or not (partial). Because it’s on the intraday scale, I don’t cover it in 
this book. As I mentioned, my Swing and Day Trading book gives full treatment 
of this gap. 


Statistics: Area Gaps 


In the tables that follow, the presentation is different than in many other 
chapters of this book. I don’t measure performance of gaps in terms of the 
ultimate high or low. Rather, I search for details that describe the behavior 
of the gaps. 

The table headings show up and down gaps, not up and down breakouts. 
The difference is in the direction price gaps, up or down. An up gap, for exam- 
ple, occurs when today’s low price is above yesterday’s high price. A down gap 
happens when today’s high is below yesterday’s low. 

Table 36.2 shows general statistics for area gaps. 

Number found. I didn’t do an exhaustive search for gaps because it was, 
well, exhausting. I used 287 stocks from July 1991 to November 2018 and 
found 4,347 gaps. They split into bull and bear markets, up and down gaps, 
and four gap types. For area gaps, I found 1,140 of the critters. I should have 
called the exterminator. 

Average time to close the gap. On average, it takes about 4 days for 
price to cover the gap, regardless of market condition or gap direction. In bull 
markets, when price gaps upward, the closing time is 1 day longer than the 
other varieties. 

Percentage closed. The table shows the closure rates. Nearly all of the 
area gaps close in the first week or two. You can scan down the other tables to 


Table 36.2 
General Statistics: Area Gaps 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 


Description Up Gap Up Gap Down Gap Down Gap 
Number found 403 196 429 112 
Average days to 5 4 4 4 

close the gap 
Closed in 1 week 85% 92% 90% 88% 
Closed in 2 weeks 99% 100% 100% 100% 


Average gap height $0.26 $0.47 $0.20 $0.48 


Statistics: Breakaway Gaps 561 


see the closure rate compared to area gaps and verify that area gaps close a lot 
faster (in days, not weeks or months) than the other types. 

Average gap size. Area gaps in bear markets are about twice as tall as 
those in bull markets. Why this is the case is a mystery to me. The smallest 
gaps occur in bull markets, with a downward direction (price gaps downward). 

That makes intuitive sense if you think of the bull market as a current 
going in one direction and a down gap as gapping in the opposite direction 
(downward). It’s like trying to ride a bicycle against the wind. However, if that’s 
really the case, then why is the up gap in bull markets also showing a small gap 
(both are moving in the same direction)? I don’t know. 


Statistics: Breakaway Gaps 


Table 36.3 shows general statistics for breakaway gaps. 

Number found. I found 1,580 breakaway gaps. That high number of 
gaps is a small sample of how often these gaps occur. You’ll see them bust out 
of a consolidation region, often on high volume which tends to remain high. 

Average time to close the gap. The average time for the gap to close 
varies from 195 days (about 6.5 months) to 430 days (14 months). The 430 
number is pulled up by about two dozen gaps that don’t close for years. 

Percentage closed. Breakaway gaps do not close quickly, as Table 36.3 
shows. Few close in the first week. Those that do close in a week make a strong 
trend for about 3 days followed by a violent reversal. The trend is too tall to 
consider them area gaps. 

After several months, there’s a number of breakaway gaps still open. 


Table 36.3 
General Statistics: Breakaway Gaps 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 


Description Up Gap Up Gap Down Gap Down Gap 
Number found 781 138 530 131 
Average days to 337 195 209 430 
close the gap 

Closed in 1 week 1% 8% 1% 0% 
Closed in 2 weeks 8% 17% 5% 12% 
Closed in 3 weeks 19% 30% 13% 33% 
Closed in 1 month 28% 38% 20% 46% 
Closed in 2 months 53% 61% 46% 68% 
Closed in 3 months 64% 75% 60% 76% 
Closed in 6 months 84% 91% 84% 92% 


Average gap height $0.66 $0.73 $1.70 $1.12 


562 = Gaps 


Average gap size. The average gap size varied across market conditions 
and gap directions, with downward gaps being larger than upward ones. 


Statistics: Continuation Gaps 


Table 36.4 shows general statistics for continuation gaps. 

Number of formations. I found 763 continuation gaps in the stocks 
I looked at. Continuation gaps occur during an existing trend, often on 
high volume. 

Average time to close the gap. Compared to breakaway gaps, continu- 
ation gaps close quicker, as one might guess (because breakaway gaps appear 
near the trend start but continuation gaps appear in the middle). The longest 
takes almost a year to close. 

Percentage closed. I show how fast (or slow) continuation gaps close 
over time. After about a month, half the gaps remain open. After 6 months, 
some still remain open. 

Average gap size. Downward gaps in bear markets are the tallest. I know 
that bear markets see price drop about twice as fast as it rises in bull markets, 
so I’m wondering if gaps help that process. 

Gap position. I measured where in the price trend the gap continuation 
gap appeared. The median gap location from the trend start to the end of the 
trend is about midway, regardless of market conditions (bull or bear) and gap 
direction (up or down). I was surprised by this, but pleased, too. I like to see 
consistent results across different conditions. 


Table 36.4 
General Statistics: Continuation Gaps 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 


Description Up Gap Up Gap Down Gap Down Gap 
Number found 284 99 222 158 
Average days to 168 121 104 343 
close the gap 
Closed in 1 week 8% 20% 15% 17% 
Closed in 2 weeks 27% 40% 31% 33% 
Closed in 3 weeks 39% 56% 46% 45% 
Closed in 1 month 46% 59% 57% 57% 
Closed in 2 months 66% 82% 72% 73% 
Closed in 3 months 74% 87% 83% 80% 
Closed in 6 months 89% 98% 95% 90% 
Average gap height $0.67 $0.67 $0.57 $1.04 
Median gap 51% 49% 50% 50% 


location in trend 


Trading Tactics and Sample Trade 563 


Table 36.5 
General Statistics: Exhaustion Gaps 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 


Description Up Gap Up Gap Down Gap Down Gap 
Number found 284 149 283 148 
Average days to 23 10 19 21 

close the gap 
Closed in 1 week 60% 75% 66% 63% 
Closed in 2 weeks 79% 89% 82% 85% 
Closed in 3 weeks 86% 93% 88% 90% 
Average gap height $0.70 $0.66 $0.59 $1.07 


Statistics: Exhaustion Gaps 


Table 36.5 shows general statistics for exhaustion gaps. Exhaustion gaps occur 
near the end of the trend, often on high volume. They can be especially tall, so 
if you see an unusually tall gap, there’s a good chance it'll be an exhaustion gap 
(no guarantee, though). Figure 36.2 shows two big gaps that set off the island 
reversal, but they are breakaway gaps, not exhaustion ones. 

Remember that after an exhaustion gap completes, there can be a violent 
reversal. That’s why our prisons are so full. 

Number of formations. I found 864 exhaustion gaps in the stocks I 
looked at. 

Average time to close the gap. Exhaustion gaps close quickly, usually 
between | and 2 weeks on average. 

Percentage closed. The table shows how quickly exhaustion gaps close. 
In one week, about two-thirds of the exhaustion gaps close. In 3 weeks, many 
of them are closed with bear markets closing slightly faster than bull markets. 

Average gap size. The average gap size varies with the largest appearing 
in bear markets with downward gaps. 


Trading Tactics and Sample Trade 


Table 36.6 lists trading tactics for gaps. To successfully trade gaps you have to 
be quick, making sure to use stops, and you have to be ready to close out a trade 
at a moment’s notice. Still, they can be profitable. Consider what Gina did with 
the situation shown in Figure 36.3. 

As a seasoned investor, Gina knew all about gaps and practiced trading 
them on a trading simulator until she was successful most of the time and 
comfortable taking a loss. The practice honed her skills and pulling the trigger 
seemed rote. 


564 = Gaps 


Trading Tactic 


Table 36.6 
Trading Tactics 


Explanation 


Area gaps 
Breakaway 
gaps 


Continuation 
gaps 


Exhaustion 
gaps 


Stop loss 


ey 


Apr 96 


I 
atl : 


These gaps are too short-lived to be traded profitably, consistently. 


If high volume is present at the start of a trend, then trade with the 
trend. Verify gap type by reviewing the identification guidelines 
before trading. 


Continuation gaps usually mark the halfway point of a short-term price 
trend so you can gauge the eventual price move. Measure from 
the trend start (the nearest minor high or low) to the gap center 
and project the difference from the gap center to the predicted 
high or low. 


If an abnormally wide gap occurs or a gap occurs at the end of a trend, 
then close out your position when the trend reverses. After an exhaus- 
tion gap completes, consider trading the new trend (shorting the 
stock if the prior trend was up). Violent reversals often follow exhaus- 
tion gaps. Close out the trade the day after new highs (for uptrends) 
or new lows (downtrends) fail to occur. 


The lower rim (for uptrends) or the higher rim (for downtrends) of a 
gap is a good place to put a stop (15 cents or so away from the rim). 
Gaps provide near-term support or resistance (but it’s weak), so this 
strategy works well with those gaps that do not close quickly. 


Alco Standard Corp (Office Equipment & Supplies, NYSE, ASN) 


Possible One-Day —— | ry 
eversa T lt | t at! Hy Ih sine 
I \ Exhaustion (E) 
IX - 60 
Continuation (C) | -59 


pttty, aN 


Breakaway (B) 
Exhaustion 


May Jun Jul 


Figure 36.3 Gina bought the stock on the breakaway gap and sold it a few days 
later for a $7,500 profit. Then she shorted the stock as the exhaustion gap turned 
into a dead-cat bounce. 


Trading Tactics and Sample Trade 565 


With a focus on limiting her losses, she was growing confident that her 
trading style was one that would allow her to succeed in the markets, so she 
took the leap and decided to trade her system for real. 

“T followed the stock for a long time and was both familiar and comfort- 
able with the fundamentals of the company. When the breakaway gap occurred 
on 10 May, I was ready. I checked the identification guidelines.” 

Volume was above average (although it may not be clear from the chart), 
and a new upward price trend seemed to be forming. “I called my broker and 
bought 1,000 shares at 58. Then I placed a stop-loss order at 57.00, or 13 cents 
below the lower gap rim just to be safe.” 

If this turned out to be an area gap, she would probably be stopped out 
for a small loss. During her paper trading days, she discovered that most gaps 
provide near-term support or resistance, so she was confident that her stop 
would hold. [Notice that she placed her stop at a round number: 57.00. I’d 
probably put it at an odd number, like 56.93, so support at 57 would help 
reverse a decline before hitting her stop]. 

“Two days later the stock gapped again. It could either be a continuation 
gap or an exhaustion gap. I didn’t know which.” Volume was heavy, about twice 
the 25-day moving average, so that offered no clue. “The following day, price 
gapped again, so I knew the prior pattern was a continuation gap.” 

Gina checked the price chart and using the center of the continuation gap 
as a midpoint, she measured from the trend low (point A in the figure) to the 
center of the gap. The difference was 5.50 (that is, 60.25 — 54.75). Adding the 
difference to the middle of the continuation gap predicted that price would top 
out at 65.75, so she placed a stop at 65.50, and moments later, the stock was 
sold. That day, the stock climbed to a high of 66, slightly above the predicted 
price, and closed the day at 63.25. 

Not including commission charges, she made $7,500 in just 4 days. But 
she was not done. The tall daily price range on high volume when she sold 
reminded her of a one-day reversal, but she was unsure. She decided to keep 
her options open and looked for an opportunity to sell short. She followed the 
stock daily, and when it closed below the support level at 61, she decided to 
sell the stock short and received a fill at 59. [Because she was a trading novice, 
I don’t recommend going short.] 

“The next day I was surprised and delighted to discover that a large 
exhaustion gap had formed, dropping the stock down to 49, for a $10,000 
gain overnight.” Knowing that the gap was in reality a dead-cat bounce, she 
changed tactics and did not immediately close out her position. 

Instead, she watched the stock bounce upward for a few days and then 
continue lower (as the formation predicts). Instead of getting greedy, she 
decided to close out her position and received a fill at 45, for an easy $14,000 
profit in less than 2 weeks. 

If you think Gina was lucky, netting over $21,000 in 2 weeks, you are 
right. But her ability to correctly size up an investment opportunity and act on 


566 Gaps 


it quickly while taking steps to minimize losses goes a long way to explaining 
her luck. Some call it skill. 

Gina is a serious investor who leaves nothing to chance. She did not just 
jump in and start trading gaps after reading about it in some book. Instead 
she researched the pattern, followed the stock closely, and developed a suc- 
cessful trading style that incorporates gaps. It worked for her, but it might not 
work for you. 


Experience 


Figure 36.4 shows the sale of a stock I owned a long time ago, based on the 
appearance of two gaps. 

In early 2013, Georgia Gulf Corporation (GGC) merged with a portion 
of PPG Industries and then was acquired by Westlake Chemical Corporation. 
It did a reverse split over a decade after I sold, and that’s why the right scale 
shows such a high price. 

Let’s talk about how I used gaps in this trade. I owned the stock and 
watched as price made a V-shaped top. At A, circled, the stock made a chart 
pattern called a narrow range 4. It says that the last price bar of the four is the 
shortest. Price gapped down out of the pattern in a breakaway gap. A day later, 
another gap appeared, an exhaustion gap. 

Here are my notes from the trade. “20 February 1998: ‘Iwo days ago, 
there was a narrow range 4 coupled with an inside day. Had I known about 
these, I might have sold it sooner, but I held on to today before I sold. This is 
now after a breakaway gap (yesterday) and an exhaustion gap (today). I suspect 


Georgia Gulf (GGC) 


| = 910 

ii chy. Breakaway Gap = 892 

, Exhaustion Gap es 

me = 38 
' a ; 

1 : f Ty " vat = 820 
A ae ee Sold h = 802 
il ee a - 

| a i 4, ‘nh, ; ~ 784 
’ weet m | i = 766 
ih walt : 


1 he 2 
f Yu ' | oo 
lt ‘ins le Math, : 6s8 


97 Dec Jan 98 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 36.4 Bulkowski sold this stock after two gaps appeared. 


Experience 567 


that the decline is over. From here, I believe it will double top then decline. 
Volume is just too high to be sustainable.” 

I received a fill at 821.88, which is just below the closing price on the day 
shown on the chart. 

The attempt at a second peak (a double top) never happened, but my pre- 
diction that the stock would continue down was correct. The stock hit bottom 
at 250 in late March 1999 for a drop of 70% below my sale price. 

I don’t use gaps often in my trading, but this is an example of how I have 
used them in the past. Gaps have helped me exit stocks near the peak. The gap 
is an exit signal, but knowledge of the stock’s fundamentals and technicals also 
helps time the exit and gives me confidence that the sell decision is correct. 


37 


Gartley, Bearish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Looks like a big W with the turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 


Downward Moves 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance rank 3 out of 5 1 (best) out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 21.5% 7.3% 
Average drop -14.1% 23.3% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Point D reversal rate 87% 89% 
See also Big W, double bottoms (all types), bearish bat, 


bearish crab, bearish butterfly 


The bearish Gartley is another pattern whose turns are governed by Fibonacci 
numbers. The actual numbers used for identification are open to debate. Your 
software may pick numbers different from the ones I chose. 

I measured performance of Fibonacci-based patterns differently than Ido 
other chart pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at the end 
of the pattern and not an up or down breakout. Therefore, the layout of this 
chapter is different from most other chapters in this book. 

The Results Snapshot shows that the performance rank of the Gartley in 
bear markets is the best out of the five types of bearish Fibonacci-based pat- 
terns studied. The performance rank measures the average decline from the 


568 


Tour 569 


high at point D in the pattern (the end of the pattern) to the ultimate low but 
only for those patterns reaching and turning down at D. 

Failure rates in bull markets are substantially higher than they are in 
bear markets. That makes sense when you consider the bullish market trend 
is fighting against the stock going down compared to giving the downtrend a 
swift kick in the pants in a bear market. 

If price makes it up to the calculated point D, there’s an 87% to 89% 
chance price will turn lower. That’s near the top-of-the-food-chain, so it’s 
good. I’Il discuss more numbers in the Statistics section. Until then, let’s take 
a tour of the pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 37.1 shows a bearish Gartley at turns XABCD. This Gartley appears in 
a longer-term downtrend that began in May 2018 from a high of just over $80. 
The pattern looks like a W from X to D, but it looks nicer on a more compact 
scale (smaller-looking up-and-down wobbles). The pattern starts at peak X and 
ends at D, forming an Eve & Adam double bottom at AC that fails to see price 
rise much above peak B. The double bottom is not part of the Gartley, just an 
observation about this example. 

When the stock reaches the predicted price of 58.83 at D (which peaks at 
59.32), the stock drops. It heads lower, dropping 25% to the ultimate low at E. 
The ultimate low is the lowest low after which price climbs more than 20% or 
closes above the top of the chart pattern (X in this case). 


Interactive Brokers Group Inc (IBKR) 


yr’ : 


, 
| 4 dy if Me 56 
| | ; ' hi 4 VW j 54 


\ \ 
| iy | | I, 
| } \ 1 ij | i! fi i es 
| ry } | 


1 fl 48 
| } 47 
t 46 


18 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


= 
—— 
> 
fa) 


Figure 37.1 This bearish Gartley sees price break out downward, and the drop 
from D was worth trading. 


570 ~— Gartley, Bearish 


If you do the math for this pattern, we will know the price D is supposed 
to be. When it appears, let’s say we short two days later, just to be safe that the 
stock has put in a top at D, filled at 55. 

We decide to sell after E put in a double bottom, at about 48. The differ- 
ence, $7 a share or 13%, is our profit. That’s a reasonable expectation for this 
trade, and it shows the power of a Gartley. You may have been able to make 
more or less, depending on your trading skills and your courage. 

One last thing: Volume trends downward as shown by line F. I know 
you’ve been waiting for me to say that, so tag, youre It. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 37.1 shows the identification guidelines for the bearish Gartley, and 
Figure 37.2 provides an example for your viewing pleasure. Don’t forget 
the popcorn. 

This bearish Gartley (which appears as turns XABCD) shows a frequent 
anomaly found in the pattern. Notice how price dips after point D before 
moving higher to G. A visual examination of 100 bearish Gartleys shows this 
behavior happens 27% of the time. Sometimes the breakout is upward, mean- 
ing the rise to G sees price close above X. That’s not the case in this example, 
though. Here, price breaks out downward at E when price closes a whisker 
below the low at A. 

If you had shorted the stock after D when price started moving lower and 
placed a tight stop a penny above the high at D, you would have been stopped 
out of the trade for a loss. Then the stock would have rubbed salt into the loss 
when price dropped in a straight-line run down to E. At E, the stock bounced 
off support and the bearish decline ended . . . for a time. 


Table 37.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic | Discussion 


Appearance Looks like a big W with the turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 
BA/XA retrace The ratio of BA/XA is .618. 
BC/BA retrace The ratio of BC/BA is one of .382, .5, .618, .707, .786, or .886. 


DC/BC extension The extension of leg DC to BC is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 1.13, 
1.27, 1.41, or 1.618. 


DA/XA retrace The ratio of DA to XA is .786. 


Volume Volume is downward the majority of the time, but this is an observation, 
not a requirement. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for most 
chart patterns. 


Identification Guidelines 571 


F5 Networks, Inc (FFIV) 


18 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 37.2 The bearish Gartley is at XABCD. Notice the minor dip after D and 
climb to G. 


The calculated D turn is at 168.45 for this pattern, so the stock overshot 
that price. Thus, if you went through the math and placed an order to short 
before checking if the stock actually turned there, you were making a mistake. 
I can’t image anyone doing that, but you never know. 

Volume in this Gartley is typical for the pattern (a downward trend). 

Appearance. The pattern is named after its founder, H. M. Gartley. It 
looks like a big W with unequal bottoms, a pattern I call an ugly double bot- 
tom. I don’t discuss ugly patterns in this book, but my website (ThePatternSite. 
com) has some details on a few patterns in case you’re interested (look for Ugly 
patterns on the home page). 

The bearish Gartley is a five-turn pattern with several of the turns obey- 
ing Fibonacci numbers; at least modern versions of the pattern apply numbers 
to the turns. Depending on which source you check, the numbers may vary 
from source to source as I mentioned. Table 37.1 shows the ones I used. 

Your pattern recognition software may use a different method and differ- 
ent Fibonacci numbers to qualify the bearish Gartley. Here’s how I identify the 
various turns in the pattern. 

BA/XA retrace. I select the first two turns, X and A, as a significant 
minor high and low, respectively. Then I look for turn B, which should create 
a .618 ratio of leg BA to XA. For Figure 37.2, I use the high at X (177.27), low 
at point A (149.87), and the high-low range of the last point of the three, B, at 
167.32 to 164.82. The thinking here is that the high—low range of the price bar 
at B should encompass the .618 number. Looking for too narrow a window will 
reduce the pattern count (but may improve performance). 


572 Gartley, Bearish 


Plugging the values into the ratio using the high at B, we get 
(167.32 — 149.87)/(177.27 — 149.87) or .64. Using the low at B, we get 
(164.82 — 149.87)/(177.27 — 149.87) or .55. Thus, the range of .55 to .64 
encompasses the target .618 Fibonacci number. Turn B qualifies as valid. 

BC/BA retrace. I use the same method to find turn C, which has a high- 
low price of 159.55 to 151. I use the high at B, the low at A, and the high-low 
range at C (the last turn in the triplet). Plugging the numbers into the BC/BA 
ratio gives a range of .445 to .935. That range should include at least one of 
the numbers listed in Table 37.1 for this line item, and it does (all except .382). 
‘Turn C is a good egg. 

DC/BC extension. Extensions use the same method as retraces. This 
time, we’re trying to find point D, so that’s the one I use the high-low price 
range on. D has a range of 171.71 to 168.50. Plugging them into the equation 
using the high at B, low at C, and the high-low range at D gives 1.07 to 1.27. 
That range includes two of the Fibonacci numbers listed in the table. Turn D 
is a valid part of the Gartley. 

DA/XA retrace. Finally, with the DA/XA retrace, I use a different 
method. I use the high at X, low at A, and high at D, but turn D must be within 
3% of the target .786 number. Using the numbers in the formula gives .80, 
which is within 3% of .786. 

Volume. Volume trends downward between 65% and 71% of the 
time, according to research I did on the pattern. See Table 37.2 for more 
information. 

Duration. I limited bearish Gartleys to no more than 6 months long. 
This is an arbitrary limit. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 37.3 shows what I consider a failure of a bearish Gartley. The Gartley is 
conveniently labeled XABCD in the figure. The idea behind a bearish Gartley 
is to see price drop after D. When it doesn’t, then that’s a failure. 

For example, in the figure, price drops from peak D, but not far (to E, 
just 4% below D), before zipping up to F (at the breakaway gap) and stag- 
ing an upward breakout. I show that breakout where price closes above the 
horizontal black line at F. Volume slopes downward from pattern start to end 
as G shows. 

I already mentioned the dip that appears after D 27% of the time, and 
this is another example of that behavior, only this stock continues higher (ver- 
sus Figure 37.2, which turns down at G). So shorting at D is a risk when trying 
to trade this pattern. 

In Figure 37.3, notice the strong upward push from the lowest low on 
the chart (in late December) to the start of the pattern (X). The Gartley acts 


Statistics 573 


Intuit Inc (INTU) 


18 Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 37.3. The move from D to E is just 4%, making it difficult to short this 
Gartley profitably. 


as a measured move up (or ABC correction if you’re an Elliott waver), with 
the drop from X to A being the corrective phase, followed by a resumption of 
the uptrend from A to the high on the chart (I know, the last leg doesn’t rise 
far enough. The stock dips to 247 in December and peaks in February 2020 at 
nearly 307). 

Maybe the next time you see such a strong push higher (the straight-line 
run from the December low to X), be cautious about taking a bearish position. 
There’s an old saying that you should avoid shorting stocks making new highs; 
short those making new lows. The failure of this pattern to make a meaningful 
drop after turn D is an example. This bearish Gartley is bullish. 


Statistics 


Table 37.2 shows general statistics for the bearish Gartley. Because the num- 
bers highlight perfect trades, your trading results will vary. I focus on the move 
after turn D to gauge performance to the ultimate low. The ultimate low is 
the lowest low before price either climbs by 20% or closes above the top of 
the Gartley. 

Number found. I unearthed 2,975 bearish Gartleys in 1,098 stocks with 
them appearing from July 1991 to September 2019. Not all stocks covered the 
entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Breakeven failure rate. This is a count of how often the stock fails to 
drop more than 5% below D. Notice that when the downward direction agrees 


574 Gartley, Bearish 


Table 37.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 2,417 558 
Breakeven failure rate 21.5% 7.3% 
Average decline after D -14.1% -23.3% 
Volume trend 71% Downward 65% Downward 
Performance Up/Down volume -13% U, -14% D —23% U, -23% D 


with the bear market trend, the failure rate is tiny (compared to other chart 
pattern types). 

In bull markets, where the turn down at D is met with a rising general 
market, the headwind keeps price from falling far. The bull market failure rate 
is huge compared to the bear market, about three times higher. That’s a gale 
force headwind ... 

Average decline after D. For swing traders, this is important. You'll 
want to know how far down the average pattern sends price. Again, the bear 
market drop outperforms the bull market drop by a wide margin, almost two 
to one. I'll use a magnifying glass in the next table and take a closer look at 
these numbers. 

Volume trend, performance. Volume trends downward, on aver- 
age, at least 65% of the time. I checked the performance of Gartleys with 
up and down trending volume and did not see a significant performance 
difference. 


Trading Tactics 


As I mentioned, the thinking behind the bearish Gartley is not to burn your 
fingers out when using a calculator to find all of the turns, but the short after 
price peaks at D. How well does that work? Let’s check some numbers, shown 
in Table 37.3. 


Table 37.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price turn at D? 87% 89% 
How many drop to point A? 34% 41% 
How many drop to point B? 99% 98% 


How many drop to point C? 51% 57% 


Sample Trade 575 


How often does price turn at D? I found that price nearly always (87% 
to 89% of the time) rises up to reach the calculated turn D. The two market 
numbers are close, too, which is reassuring. So you can know ahead of time at 
what price D will appear. Then you can wait with Snoopy for it to show, like 
what’s his name in the pumpkin patch in the Charley Brown series. After price 
turns, then you short. But how far down will the stock drop? 

How many drop to. . .? For those patterns that do see price reach and 
turn at D, how far down does price drop? I used the pattern’s turns to help 
gauge this. 

For example, turn B is closest to turn D, so you would expect a high rate 
of price reaching that turn. Indeed, nearly all of the patterns will drop to B. 

At the bottom of the pattern is point A. In bull markets, less than half 
(34%) will see price drop that far. Bear markets do better with price reaching 
the bottom of the pattern 41% of the time, but that’s still less than half the 
patterns. Clearly you'll do better trading this pattern in bear markets than in 
bull ones. 

Now that you have the probabilities of price reaching one of the turns in 
the Gartley, you can pick your target. 

Let’s read how George traded a Gartley. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 37.4 shows how George used a bearish Gartley to trade a stock. His 
software found the pattern for him at XABCD. He measured the rise from A to 


Acuity Brands, Inc (AYI) F G 
et, 60 
arrnal % | Nata se 
y) gt he yw 
fay 
oof | 54 
Pea" J 52 
mi 
x wre * 
, ff Ef re 
:. 6 
ha | f ah, B fy 45 
, ae aa 
leh. at | | ‘ vs, bp Initial Stop aS 
Pe ov @ 
[ L my \ 
fi ' P| a - 


10 Mar Apr May = Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec jan11 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 37.4 George traded this bearish Gartley like a normal chart pattern. 


576 — Gartley, Bearish 


B (43.56 — 34.70) or 8.86. He added this to the low at C to get a target of 8.86 + 
35.73 or 44.59. Point D’s high was 45.38, which is close to the predicted target. 

George calculated how long it would take price to rise to D. Using points 
A (2 July 2010), B (27 July 2010), and C (24 August 2010) as references, he 
added the 25-day span of AB to C to get 18 September 2010. Point D came 
close, peaking on September 30. This method was a way to calculate point 
D, given the ABC turns. The idea depends on the AB=CD pattern working 
(where leg CD equals AB both in time and price). 

However, George doesn’t like to short stocks. “Too dangerous. Remem- 
ber what happened to Joe Campbell?” 

Joe had $37,000 in his brokerage and bet a $2 biotech stock would fall 
further. The next day, the stock surged to $16, wiping out his account and with 
the brokerage handing him a bill for an additional $106,000. 

George decided to trade this Gartley like a normal chart pattern. He 
measured the height of the Gartley, from X (47.91) to A (34.70) or 13.21. That 
gave him a target of 61.12 (when he added the height to the price of the top 
of the Gartley, X). 

When price gapped higher (breakaway gap) at E and broke out upward 
(closed above the price of X), he bought the stock long and received a fill 
at 47.59 (the opening price the next day). He placed a stop at 43.21 or 9% 
below his purchase price. That’s a few pennies below the minor low just after 
D (2 days before the gap). He placed an order to sell if the stock reached the 
61.12 target. 

Price continued moving higher and higher. 

At H, price formed a minor high. When it resumed its upward trend, gap- 
ping higher again (a breakaway gap) above the peak at H, he raised his stop to 
K (below the minor low). 

At ¥, the stock peaked at 60.73, close to his 61.12 target. But it closed 
down substantially, almost hitting his stop-loss order. 

He remained in his trade but became nervous. “I should have sold near 
the peak.” He pointed to his screen, at F. Isn’t hindsight wonderful? 

At I, the stock made a minor low. When it gapped higher (area gap) two 
days later, he raised his stop to 53.72, just below I. 

At J, the stock dropped to his stop and took him out of the trade. If he 
held on for a few more weeks, the stock would have hit his 61.12 target at G 
and taken him out for a larger profit. 

He bought at 47.59, sold at 53.72, and made 6.13 a share (13%). Had he 
held on until price reached his target, he would have made 13.53 ashare or 28%. 

The stock peaked at G, the ultimate high, at 61.45. After that, it dropped 
all the way down to 38 and change. 


38 


Gartley, Bullish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Looks like a big M with the turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 


Upward Moves 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance rank 5 (worst) out of 5 4 out of 5 
Breakeven failure rate 13.5% 5.9% 
Average rise 36.3% 29.2% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Point D reversal rate 90% 86% 
See also Big M, double tops (all types), bullish bat, bullish crab, 
bullish butterfly 


The bullish Gartley is another variation of Fibonacci patterns. This one looks 
like a big M with the right top slightly lower than the left. If I saw a twin peak 
pattern with a lower second peak, it would suggest the bulls were struggling 
to attain the height of the left peak and lost. And that would mean a larger 
decline. 

I measured performance of Fibonacci-based patterns differently than I do 
other chart pattern types. That’s because we’re looking for a reversal at the end 
of the pattern and not an up or down breakout. Therefore, the layout of this 
chapter is different from most other chapters in this book. Only compare these 
results with other Fibonacci patterns. 


577 


578 — Gartley, Bullish 


Of the five bullish Fibonacci-based patterns I looked at, the bullish 
Gartley in bull markets is the worst performer. The breakeven failure rate in 
both bull and bear markets for this pattern ranks last (worst). 

The reversal rate is very good, though, at 86% to 90% of the time. That 
means if you expect price to turn at the end of the pattern, there’s a very good 
chance it will. 

‘To get a complete picture, let’s see what a bullish Gartley looks like and 
discuss some numbers. 


Tour 


Figure 38.1 shows an example of a bullish Gartley that works like it’s supposed 
to. The pattern begins at X, which some describe as a major turn. My collec- 
tion of Gartleys accepted any wide minor low as the first turn. Following X is 
a peak, a minor high, shown as point A. Both X and A are consecutive but not 
necessarily adjacent turns. However, as the chart shows, there can be interven- 
ing peaks or valleys between the two. Point B is located at a Fibonacci retrace 
of the XA rise (I'll explain what that means in the next section). 

Additional turns follow (C and D), with each turn determined by a Fibo- 
nacci number. Let me say that the actual Fibonacci numbers used is open to 
interpretation. I’ve seen numbers different from the ones I chose. Your soft- 
ware may use a different algorithm to find Gartleys, so keep that in mind. They 
may perform better . . . or worse. 

After price bottoms at D, it’s supposed to move higher, which it does in 
this case by laying down a straight-line run to E. Notice how peak E appears at 
overhead resistance set up by peak A. In this example, the stock retraces some, 
but eventually stages an upward breakout when price closes above the top of 
the pattern at F 


Aon Corp (AON) 


17 Dec Jan 18 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 38.1 This bullish Gartley appears as turns XABCD. 


Identification Guidelines 579 


So there you have it. The Gartley is at XABCD. Price climbs after D if 
the pattern is on its best behavior. Volume (G) trends lower most of the time 
like that shown. 

How do we actually find Gartleys? Here’s a hint: Don’t look in the pro- 
duce section. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 38.1 shows identification guidelines similar to all Fibonacci patterns, 
and Figure 38.2 shows another example of a bullish Gartley. 

How do I find Gartleys? Let me count the ways. Actually, I programmed 
my computer to do the counting for me. If you want a copy of my pattern- 
finding software, visit my website at www. ThePatternSite.com. You can 
download and use a copy for free without any registration process or annoy- 
ing ads. It’ll find a garden full of butterflies, bats, crabs, including those pesky 
neighbors, the Gartleys. 

Figure 38.2 shows a Gartley at XABCD. Price rises to F, hits overhead 
resistance, and fades, falling to G. Neither F nor G are outside the XA height, 
so a breakout hasn’t happened at those turns. However, price rebounds to H, 
where an upward breakout happens, and price works its way higher after that 
(for a time, anyway). 

Volume, in this example, trends upward, which is unusual for a bullish 
Gartley despite what you may have heard on the cocktail circuit. 

Appearance. The pattern looks like a big M or double top with the right 
peak (C) lower than the left (A), sometimes by a substantial amount. You might 
think of it as an ugly double top (see my website for details). 

AB/AX retrace. Turn B is located by calculating the retrace of the 
move up from X. To do this, I use the low price at X (31.49), the high price 
at point A (37.06), and the high-low price range at the target, B (33.83 to 


Table 38.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic | Discussion 


Appearance Looks like a big M with the turns located by Fibonacci ratios. 
AB/AX retrace —_ The ratio of AB/AX is .618. 
CB/AB retrace The ratio of CB/AB is one of .382, .5, .618, .707, .786, or .886. 


CD/CB extension The extension of leg CD to CB is one of the Fibonacci numbers: 1.13, 
1.27, 1.41, or 1.618. 


AD/AX retrace —_ The ratio of AD to AX is .786. 


Volume Volume is downward the majority of the time, but this is an observation, 
not a requirement. 


Duration | limited patterns to 6 months, but this is an arbitrary limit | use for 
many chart patterns. 


580 — Gartley, Bullish 


Caleres (CAL) 


18 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb 


Figure 38.2 This bullish Gartley struggles to find a trend direction. 


33.20). Plugging the numbers into the formula using the high price at B, we 
get (37.06 — 33.83)/(37.06 — 31.49) or .58. Using the low price at B, we get 
(37.06 — 33.20)/(37.06 — 31.49) or .69. The range of .58 to .69 encompasses 
the target .618, so point B qualifies as the first Fibonacci turn in the Gartley. 

CB/AB retrace. Find turn C in the same manner. I use the high price at 
A, the low at B, and the high-low range of target C (36.38 to 35.02). Plugging 
the numbers into the ratio gives a range of .47 to .82. That range includes four 
Fibonacci numbers listed in Table 38.1 (any one of them will do just fine, thank 
you very much), so point C qualifies as a valid turn, also. 

CD/CB extension. Calculate an extension in the same way as a retrace. 
In this case, I use the low at B, high at C, and the high-low range at D (34.10 
to 32.66) to get a range of .72 to 1.17. The 1.13 Fibonacci number squeaks into 
the range, so point D qualifies. We’ve one more ratio to calculate before we 
pronounce this a valid Gartley. 

AD/AX retrace. For the last ratio, leg AD as a retrace of AX, I use the 
low at X, high at A, and low at D. Notice I don’t use the high-low range at D. 
Rather, turn D must fall within a 3% window. Why? I wanted the last turn to 
be almost dead-on. In this example, point D comes in at .79, which squeezes 
through the 3% (of .786) window easily. 

Passing that last ratio test means this pattern is a valid Gartley. However, 
one source I checked said that the height of leg CD should be a Fibonacci 
number of AB, so that it acts like an AB=CD pattern. You can add that test to 
see if performance improves. 

Volume. We’ll see in Table 38.2 that volume trends downward 62% of 
the time. Figure 38.2 shows an exception when volume (E) trends upward. To 
determine the volume trend, I checked the slope of a line found using linear 
regression. Often, you can just look at volume and see how it’s trending. 


Focus on Failures 581 


Table 38.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,918 394 
Breakeven failure rate 13.5% 5.9% 
Average rise after D 36.3% 29.2% 
Volume trend 62% Downward 62% Downward 
Performance Up/Down volume 37% U, 36% D 25% U, 32% D 


ArcBest Corp (ARCB) 


hay ye" 4 : 
\ ay, re 


IJ W 
qh uy A 45 


May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 38.3 Price fails to rise much after D, and the Gartley breaks out downward. 


Don’t let the volume trend prevent you from trading a Gartley (or most 
other chart pattern types). You'll discover than the volume is a poor indicator 
of future performance. 

Duration. The pattern has no maximum duration, but I set a limit of 
about 6 months for the patterns I catalogued. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 38.3 shows a classic example of a bullish Gartley failure. The Gartley 
is at XABCD, with volume trending downward, G. 

After turn D, the stock is supposed to rise. It does, but only to E in this 
case. If you bought long at the open on that day with a stop a penny or two 
below D, you’d have been stopped out when price stumbled on the way to F. 

Looking at this pattern from X to F, notice that F bottoms near the price 
of X. I call X the launch price, and you sometimes see a reversal pattern that 


582 = Gartley, Bullish 


sends the stock back down like the one shown here. The stock will bottom 
near the price of X, often slightly higher than X. It doesn’t happen that often, 
but such behavior (not just for Gartleys, but for all chart pattern types) can 
help you determine how far price might drop. It also might give you a buying 
opportunity when the stock turns upward at F. 

Notice the inverted-roof-type pattern from May to October (and even 
a diamond bottom hiding in the middle of it, as shown). When I see a break- 
down from this type of horizontal top and a bullish pattern emerges afterward, 
just as the Gartley does here, I know it’s a disaster waiting to spring on the 
bulls. The pattern invariably fails and down price goes. Learn from this exam- 
ple and don’t go long after the breakdown from a horizontal topping pattern. 


Statistics 


Table 38.2 shows general statistics for the bullish Gartley. 

Number found. Gartleys were plentiful, especially in bull markets. 
The bear markets, two of them, were shorter than the bull markets, so you’d 
expect to see fewer patterns. However, and this was a quick calculation, more 
Gartleys appear in bear markets than in bull markets when adjusted for the 
time involved. 

Breakeven failure rate. I counted the number of times a bullish Gartley 
saw price rise less than or equal to 5% on the way to the ultimate high. 

It’s odd that bear markets have lower failure rates than bull markets. Bull 
markets see price climb, helped along by the general market. Bear markets see 
price rise in a falling market. I would expect that when price struggles against 
a headwind (such as in bear markets), it wouldn’t rise as far (meaning more 
failures), but that’s not what happens. 

Average rise after D. I measured the average rise for Gartleys from the 
low at D to the ultimate high. Patterns in bull markets performed better than 
did those in bear markets. That makes sense. 

Volume trend, performance. I used linear regression to determine the 
volume trend from the start of the pattern to the end. Volume trends down- 
ward most often. I checked if performance was better when volume sloped 
upward or downward, and there’s not much of a difference in bull markets. 
Bear markets give the performance edge to those patterns having a downward 
volume trend. 


Trading Tactics 


The idea behind the bullish Gartley is that once the pattern completes at D, 
the stock will turn upward. Because you can do the math and calculate where 


Sample Trade 583 


D is going to be, you can anticipate the turn. We’ll see in a moment that 86% 
to 90% of Gartleys turn upward at D. So be patient and see if D forms where 
you expect. 

When it’s clear that the stock has found a bottom at D or is making its 
move higher, then buy the stock. Ride it upward. Table 38.3 provides guidance 
on how far price might climb, based on the Gartley turns. 

Table 38.3 shows numbers important to swing traders. 

How often does price turn at D? If price makes it down to D, does it turn 
there? Yes, and almost all of the time (86% or higher). Thus, you can depend 
on a Gartley seeing a reversal at D. Of course, even for a pattern with a high 
reversal rate, that says nothing about how far price will trend upward after D. 

How many rise to. . .? For those turning upward at D, I mapped how 
often the stock climbed to the price of one of the turns. For example, point B 
is closest to turn D, and we see that nearly all of the time price will climb up 
to the price of B. 

The top of the pattern is at turn A. The stock only reaches the price of 
A less than half the time (bull markets) and less than a third of the time in 
bear markets. 

Hopefully, you can use these statistics to help decide if a Gartley is worth 
trading. Your situation may be different, and other indicators may help you 
select patterns that will outperform. 


Sample Trade 


My brother called last night, and we chatted about stocks. His holding in Netflix 
jumped upward on good quarterly numbers. “How should I trade it?” he asked. 

“In about a week to ten days, it’ll peak. Sell it then.” That’s what I told 
him. It reminds me of a trade Jacob made. See Figure 38.4. 

Jacob’s computer flagged the Gartley XABCD) and showed him where 
turn D was expected to appear. Looking to the left of point D, he saw points B 
and E were near the same price. “That’s support,” he told me. Except for the 
plunge at X, the rest of the pattern (EBD) seemed to be resting on a flat table. 


Table 38.3 
Price Move after Pattern End 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
How often does price turn at D? 90% 86% 
How many rise to point A? 45% 31% 
How many rise to point B? 98% 98% 


How many rise to point C? 59% 49% 


584 — Gartley, Bullish 


Caleres (CAL) 7 
synth 16 
| of ie 
: “a ji 14 
i jos 13 
hh dy ay 12 
i Pas 11 
sti ath, t 
iis | 9 
val ' | th, c G 10 
1 yl Bee 
Nay ha si La Ai 9 
it A wit fila ih fa rf ye! 
ft \y Ws . D5 8 
Xx 
7 
Dec Jan 12 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 38.4 Jacob bought after this Gartley completed but sold quickly. 


“Two days after the stock reached D [point F on the chart], I bought at 
the open at 8.51.” 

He set a target for the top of the pattern, 10.53, which is a few pennies 
below the low price at A (not above the high at A, because he wanted to sell in 
the resistance area, not hope price would rise above a peak). Because this was a 
short-term swing trade, he placed a stop-loss order a few pennies below D, at 
8.23, with his broker. 

The stock worked its way higher for a week and then took off, making a 
large one-day price jump. The stock blew through his target, but, fortunately, 
he didn’t place a se// order with his broker. “I like to pick my exits [which I think 
is less profitable for swing trades than picking a target ahead of time and sell- 
ing automatically if it hits].” 

When a stock makes a sharp move higher, as I mentioned, it often crests 
in a week to ten days. He counted down and one calendar week after the big 
move (G), “I sold the stock at the open (H) at 12.05 for a gain of 3.82 or 46% 
in about two weeks. Nice!” 

For a swing trade, he did exceptionally well. He bought near the low and 
missed selling at the peak by a few days (too late). Obviously, for a longer-term 
hold, he sold way too early. The stock drifted down for a month but then con- 
tinued higher. 

The rise at G was earnings related (the company announced first-quarter 
results). Notice the trend, how price peaks quickly (7-10 days), retraces for 
a month, and then moves higher at a more sedate pace over many months. 
You may notice this behavior in other stocks related to the announcement of 
surprisingly good earnings. They can make for profitable trades, both swing 
trades like Jacob’s and longer-term holds. 


39 


Head-and-Shoulders 
Bottoms 


| 
Mi 
LS 


i] 
Mal 
|| \ 
a RS 
H 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Three-valley pattern with center valley lower than the others so that the 
pattern resembles an inverted head-and-shoulders bust. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish Intermediate-term bullish 
reversal reversal 
Performance rank 13 out of 39 10 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 11% 9% 
Average rise 45% 28% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
‘Throwbacks 65% 66% 
Percentage meeting price target 71% 51% 
Synonym Inverse head-and-shoulders 
See also Head-and-shoulders bottoms, complex, 


triple bottom 


I find it easier to pick tops rather than bottom patterns. Perhaps this is 
because I spend so much time worrying about when to sell. Placing a trade is 


585 


586 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 


easy; getting out for a profit is the tough part. In my quest to sell at the appro- 
priate time, I have often overlooked the buy side: bottom reversals. Head-and- 
shoulders bottoms are just such a pattern. They are quite easy to spot and can 
be profitable. 

The Results Snapshot highlights statistics for this bullish reversal. The 
performance rank is good but not outstanding. The head-and-shoulders pat- 
tern has a low breakeven failure rate and a nice average rise. Volume trends 
downward between the two shoulders, and that’s typical for many chart pat- 
terns. Throwbacks occur in two of every three patterns. Again, that’s typical. In 
fact, I don’t see anything unusual with the numbers. Grab your bag lunch and 
let’s start the tour. 


Tour 


What does the chart pattern look like? Figure 39.1 shows an example of a 
head-and-shoulders bottom. The stock peaks during February, where the chart 
begins. From that point, the stock moves downward and makes a lower low 
in late March before moving up. The turn forms the left shoulder. The stock 
declines again and reaches a new low during late April, creating the head. The 
right shoulder appears as the stock recovers and then continues moving down 
along the trendline (shown in the figure as the neckline). By mid-August 1995 
(not shown), the stock is trading just below 60. 


Arrow Electronics Inc (Electronics, NYSE, ARW) 
-45 


af Ph - 
i Mh ae 


I 


-41 
40 
39 
ei 38 

I " I -37 

Loree | Oo | 

Left Shoulder Ml mull ul = = 7 
34 
=33 
32 
-31 
~30 
~29 


- 28 
Feb 94 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 39.1 A head-and-shoulders bottom. Two shoulder troughs surround a 
lower head. 


Tour 587 


This head-and-shoulders bottom has a typical volume pattern. Volume is 
usually highest on the head, then the left shoulder, and even lower on the right 
shoulder. This head-and-shoulders pattern shows little increase in volume 
during the rise from the head to the right shoulder. Volume on the breakout 
is unexciting and that helps explain why the stock stalls. Upward momentum 
fails to carry price much higher; the stock rounds over and heads back down 
through June. 

Figure 39.2 shows a head-and-shoulders pattern on a weekly scale. 
I chose this chart to show you the typical trend of head-and-shoulders bottom 
reversal. It usually forms after an extended price downtrend. As a reversal, once 
the chart pattern completes, price rises. 

Why do head-and-shoulders form? The chart pattern represents a strug- 
gle to find the bottom, the lowest price that represents the best value. As the 
stock descends during the winter of 1993, investors nibble at the stock in 
increasing numbers. Volume climbs even as the stock descends until it spikes 
upward for 1 week during formation of the left shoulder. 

Buying demand puts a crimp on the downward slide, and price moves up 
but only for a week. The following week, price moves lower. Again, volume 
spikes as the stock makes a new low, and this becomes the head. The smart 
money is accumulating the stock in anticipation of an eventual rise or a change 
in the fundamentals. The stock moves up on receding volume, then retreats 
and forms the right shoulder. 

Volume on the three valleys is diminishing. The left shoulder has very 
high volume, the head exhibits somewhat less volume, and the right shoulder 


Allen Telecom Inc (Telecom. Equipment, NYSE, ALN) 


al 
wll il 


H ll [hat yt 23 
| | aay! 


i " -17 
I! Mh, —“_* 2 


Left aa Head \ Right Shoulder 


933 AS OND92%FMAMYJ J AS ONDISFMAMYJ J AS 


Figure 39.2 Head-and-shoulders bottom pattern on a weekly time scale. It takes 
several months before this head-and-shoulders bottom stages an upward breakout. 


588 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 


records the lowest volume of the three valleys. Only after price starts moving 
up from the right shoulder does volume spike upward. 

Breakout volume is unconvincing. In late August 1994, price moves 
decidedly above the neckline and stages a definitive breakout. Even so, it is not 
until 2 weeks later that volume advances noticeably. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 39.1 encapsulates the identification guidelines for head-and-shoulders. 
Consider Figure 39.3, a handsome head-and-shoulders bottom on the daily 
chart. This example of a head-and-shoulders does not appear at the end of a 
long-term downtrend but at a short-term one (up to 3 months). The pattern 
reverses the downtrend but continues the long-term uptrend (acting like the 
corrective phase of a measured move up chart pattern). 

Appearance. Overall, the pattern sports the three telltale valleys: left 
shoulder, head, and right shoulder. The left shoulder is at about the same price 
level as the right one and appears to be about the same width. Such symmetry 
is common in head-and-shoulders patterns (tops, bottoms, and the complex 
variety). If the left shoulder is sharp or pointed, the right shoulder will be, too 
(but be flexible in your assessment). I don’t pay attention to shoulder shape. 

The head is below both shoulders by a reasonable amount. By this charac- 
teristic I mean the pattern is not a triple bottom—three valleys at about the same 


Table 39.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price declines into a three-valley pattern with the center valley below 
the other two. It looks like a head-and-shoulders bust flipped upside- 
down. The three valleys and two minor rises should appear well 
defined. Price moves higher after the pattern ends. 

Symmetry The left and right shoulders should be opposite one another about the 
head, somewhat equidistant in both time and price. There are wide 
variations, but the pattern is noticeably symmetrical about the head. 


Volume Usually highest on the left shoulder or head and diminished on the 
right shoulder. 
Neckline A line that connects the rise between the two shoulders. A neckline 


pierce signals an upward breakout. For up-sloping necklines, use the 
right armpit as the breakout price. 


Breakout The breakout is upward, usually on high volume that powers price 
direction upward. A low volume breakout is not an indicator of an impend- 
ing failure. 
Confirmation Price must close above a down-sloping neckline or above the price of 


the right armpit. 


Identification Guidelines 589 


3 Com Corp (Computers & Peripherals, NASDAQ, COMS) 


hy hel Ss 
Ht lI i! 31 


fa 1 t Mi, mr 28 


i Th Left pede i Right Shoulder 


Feb 95 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 39.3 A rare head-and-shoulders consolidation of the primary uptrend. 


price level. The head should be proportional to the shoulders. Consider discard- 
ing a pattern with an unusually tall neck or shoulders too uneven to be healthy. 

In the figure, the left shoulder sees price decline for 3 days, reverses, and 
climbs to a minor high. Similarly, the rise between the head and right shoulder 
climbs almost to the height of the rise between the left shoulder and head, 
then descends to the right shoulder. All five features, the three valleys and two 
minor rises, appear well defined and distinct. The features are important as 
you scan your charts looking for head-and-shoulders bottoms. 

Symmetry. Symmetry is another important key to selecting a valid head- 
and-shoulders bottom. The right side of the pattern usually mimics the left 
side. The right shoulder declines to about the price level of the left shoulder 
and the distances of both from the head are similar. Of course, there are many 
variations, but symmetry should make a head-and-shoulders bottom stand out 
from a sequence of any three depressions. 

Volume. Volume represents another clue to the validity of a bottom. The 
left shoulder or head has the highest volume, with diminished volume on the 
right shoulder. 

Breakout volume is usually high as it pushes price above the neckline. As a 
general guideline, volume will rise on the day of the breakout, but it need not. 
Don’t discard a pattern because it has an unusual volume pattern. 

Neckline. The neckline is an imaginary line connecting the two rises 
between the shoulders and the head. It can slope downward, upward, or be 
horizontal. In well-formed patterns, the slope of the line is not very steep, but 
a steep neckline should not be a disqualifier of a head-and-shoulders bottom 
(Figure 39.1 has a rather steep neckline). 


590 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 


Breakout direction. When price closes above a down-sloping trendline 
or above the right armpit (the highest high between the head and right shoul- 
der), that occurrence signals an upward breakout. Use the right armpit as the 
breakout price instead of an up-sloping neckline because you may get a buy 
signal sooner. You may never get a signal in a head-and-shoulders bottom with 
a steep up-sloping neckline. 

Confirmation. The pattern confirms as valid when price closes above 
the neckline or right armpit. If price closes below the head, then it’s not a head- 
and-shoulders bottom. 


Focus on Failures 


Head-and-shoulders bottoms have two types of failures. The first type, shown 
in Figure 39.4, is a failure of the head-and-shoulders bottom to pierce the 
neckline and move higher. As you would expect, the chart pattern appears in 
a downward price trend. The highest price peak is partly visible in the upper- 
left corner of the figure. From the high of 38.75, price falls to the low at the 
head, 21.25, a decline of 45%. When the bottom forms, it should signal a 
trend reversal. 

An interesting thing about this example is that the left shoulder is almost 
the same shape as the right. Only a dollar separates the two shoulder lows, and 
the head is well below both shoulder valleys. The right shoulder is somewhat 
farther away from the head than the left. This characteristic is typical. 


ASA Holdings (Air Transport, NASDAQ, ASAI) 


I! hy, | 
bi |, 7 ; Lita by, rh _~28 
"hy ha" "hy fur is! ty 26 
bn I ie Right 


\ ae 
Lef | oulder lh \ i I 
spol l eae “" . | ae 


Head 


bie 


ful 44 


.. 
-10 


Mar 94 Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 39.4 Failure of a head-and-shoulders bottom to stage an upward breakout. 


Focus on Failures 591 


Volume is suspiciously low throughout the pattern. The left shoulder and 
head register about the same level of volume. The right shoulder volume, how- 
ever, is higher than the other two. Of course, an irregular volume pattern is no 
reason to discard a chart pattern, but it is a warning signal. 

After the right shoulder forms and price begins rising, volume tapers off 
rapidly, and the attempt to pierce the neckline fails. The rally attempt does not 
even come close to the neckline. 

Looking at the overall chart pattern, there is no one item that signals an 
impending failure. There is some suspicious activity, principally the abnormal 
volume pattern, but nothing to deter an investor. 

Figure 39.5 shows a slightly different type of failure. This is what I call 
a 5% failure. The two shoulders and head appear well formed and distinct. 
The left shoulder looks different from the right, but the twin rises between 
the shoulders (armpits) look similar. The price level of the two shoulders is not 
suspiciously out of line. 

Volume is unusual. Heavy volume appears near the head as price rises 
away from it toward the right shoulder. The right shoulder volume looks like 
something you would want to tackle with your shaver: annoying but not high 
enough to be alarming. 

Price advances smartly after the right shoulder bottom forms and then 
moves sideways for 2 weeks before starting back down. 

Although this example does have an upward breakout, price fails to rise 
by more than 5% above the neckline. Price should reach 39.38 to meet the 5% 


Airborne Freight (Air Transport, NYSE, ABF) 


Right 
Shoulder - 33 


, 
1H I ya! | Left 
II Shoulder 


Head 


Jan 94 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 39.5 A 5% failure in a head-and-shoulders bottom. Price must rise by 
more than 5% before the chart pattern is a success. A 5% rise should take price to 
39.38 but it does not happen. 


592 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 


threshold, but does not. The result is a failure of the 5% rule: Price must rise 
by more than 5% after a breakout or the chart pattern is a dud. 


Statistics 


Table 39.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found the first head-and-shoulders in July 1991 and 
the last in December 2019 in 1,036 stocks, giving me 3,832 patterns. Not all 
stocks covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, head-and- 
shoulders bottoms act as reversals of the prevailing downward price trend. 

Average rise. In bull markets, the average rise is above the 42.4% aver- 
age in bull markets and ties the 28% rate in bear markets. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The general market rise helps push 
price higher in bull markets but doesn’t offer much assistance in bear markets. 
Notice, though, how the average rise for the head-and-shoulders bottom wal- 
lops the S&P’s rise, even though both use the same dates (breakout to ulti- 
mate high). 

Days to ultimate high. Price climbs 1.6 times faster in bear markets. 
I found this by taking the ratio of 45% rise in 227 days compared to a rise of 
28% in 91 days. That is an interesting finding if you happen to be in a bear 
market. Although the average rise will not be as large, price will top out sooner, 
allowing you to trade more often. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how many patterns see 
price rise more than 20% after the breakout. A higher number is better. I like 
to see values above 50%, and the bull market does very well. The bear market 
comes close, too. So the head-and-shoulders bottom is a good performer. 

Table 39.3 shows failure rates. I found that 11% of the patterns in bull 
markets fail to see price rise more than 5%. The failure rate doubles to 22% 
for patterns failing to rise more than 10% (ouch/). It almost triples the break- 
even rate for failures to rise more than 15% (Yikes/). 


Table 39.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 3,197 635 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average rise 45% 28% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% 1% 
Days to ultimate high 227 91 


How many change trend? 61% 46% 


Table 39.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Maximum Price Rise (%) 


Bull Market 


Statistics 593 


Bear Market 


5 (breakeven) 336 or 11% 60 or 9% 
10 371 or 22% 125 or 29% 
15 319 or 32% 83 or 42% 
20 235 or 39% 74 or 54% 
25 235 or 47% 65 or 64% 
30 190 or 53% 48 or 72% 
35 196 or 59% 25 or 76% 
50 381 or 71% 59 or 85% 
75 403 or 83% 54 or 93% 
Over 75 531 or 100% 42 or 100% 
Table 39.4 

Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 100% up 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


Throwbacks occurrence 

Average time to throwback peaks 

Average time to throwback ends 

Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 


Percentage price resumes trend 


Performance with breakout day gap 
Performance without breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


L 45%, M 46%, 
H 44% 


65% 

7% in 6 days 
12 days 
43% 

50% 

75% 


48% 
45% 
$0.43 


L 30%, M 26%, 
H 28% 


66% 

8% in 6 days 
11 days 
25% 

33% 

65% 


32% 
27% 
$0.76 


Bear markets show a steeper progression, from 9% to 29% to 42%. 
In bull markets, the median failure rate is 27.5% and in bear markets, 


it’s 18.7%. 


Table 39.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is always upward. If price 
closes below the head first, then you don’t have a head-and-shoulders bottom. 
In fact, a close below the right shoulder would make the pattern look weird, 
too. However, it might be forming a complex head-and-shoulders bottom. 


594 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 


Yearly position, performance. Head-and-shoulders patterns in bull 
markets do not show a significant performance difference depending on where 
in the yearly high-low price range the breakout resides. The numbers say the 
middle third perform best. In bear markets, those near the yearly low do best. 

Throwbacks. Throwbacks occur two-thirds of the time, and when they 
do happen, it takes about 11 or 12 days for the stock to return to the breakout 
price. If a throwback occurs, performance suffers. However, price resumes the 
upward trend between 65% and 75% of the time. 

Gaps. Does a gap on the breakout day indicate better performance? Yes. 
Head-and-shoulders bottoms with a breakout gap perform better than do 
those without a gap. I use the opening price the day after the gap in the meas- 
ure to the ultimate high, so you can participate in the better performance of 
patterns with gaps by buying after the gap appears. 

Table 39.5 shows size statistics for the head-and-shoulders pattern. 

Height. Most chart patterns perform best when the pattern is taller than 
the median, and the head-and-shoulders is no exception. In bear markets, for 
example, tall patterns see price rise an average of 32%, but short ones rise just 
24%. I measured height from the highest high to the lowest low in the pattern, 
then divided by the breakout price, so 1 was comparing apples to apples. 

Width. The results for width are not consistent across market conditions. 
Bull markets show wide patterns leading to better performance, and bear mar- 
kets show narrow ones outperforming. 

I used the median length to separate narrow from wide patterns. 

Height and width combinations. I looked at the combinations of height 
and width and found that patterns both tall and wide do well in bull markets. 


Table 39.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 47% 32% 
Short pattern performance 43% 24% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 13.4% 19.8% 
Narrow pattern performance 44% 31% 
Wide pattern performance 46% 25% 
Median width 37 days 39 days 
Short and narrow performance 42% 26% 
Short and wide performance 44% 21% 
Tall and wide performance 48% 28% 


Tall and narrow performance 47% 40% 


Statistics 595 


Bear markets prefer tall and narrow patterns. The worst performers are short 
patterns, but check the tables for actual numbers because they vary for differ- 
ent market conditions. 

Table 39.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most of the time. Again, don’t 
throw away a pattern just because it has an unusual volume trend. 

Rising/Falling volume. I didn’t see any performance difference for ris- 
ing or falling volume in bull markets. Bear markets do better if volume is rising 
from shoulder to shoulder. 

Breakout day volume. Does high breakout volume guarantee better 
performance? No, at least not in bull markets. In bear markets, those with 
heavy breakout volume performed better than did those with light breakout 
day volume. 

Table 39.7 shows how often price reached a stop location but my com- 
puter doesn’t tabulate them correctly for this pattern, so I don’t show the table. 

Table 39.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. This pattern performed best in the 2000s and 
worst in the 2010s, but the performance differences are minor. Seeing a pat- 
tern with stable performance over time is as refreshing as sipping ice water on 
a hot day. 


Table 39.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 65% down 65% down 
Rising volume trend performance 45% 30% 
Falling volume trend performance 45% 27% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 45% 29% 
Light breakout volume performance 45% 26% 

Table 39.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 45% 
2000s 46% 
2010s 44% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 5% 
2000s 9% 


2010s 17% 


596 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 


Failures over time. Failures have tripled since the 1990s, which is an 
alarming trend (if it continues). 

Table 39.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. I consider the busted count low for this 
chart pattern. 

Busted occurrence. Most of the time, the pattern will single bust, but 
double busts (in bull markets) are close behind. In bear markets, nearly all of 
the busted patterns are single busted ones. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used the head-and-shoulders 
top as the proxy for a non-busted head-and-shoulders bottom. In bull markets, 
single busted patterns outperform the other two benchmarks, but in bear mar- 
kets, they don’t do as well as a head-and-shoulders top pattern. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 39.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to set a target to help gauge 
how far price might rise. In Figure 39.6, the head marks the lowest price in the 
chart pattern. Subtract the height from the value of the neckline directly above. In 
this example, the head has a daily low price of 13.13, and the neckline, measured 
vertically, is at 17.50. Add the difference, 4.37, to the breakout price. A breakout 
occurs on 28 March. I use its opening price the next day as the breakout price 
(15.88) to get a target price of 20.25. Price reaches the target in early September. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often the measure rule target 
works using varying heights in the computation. The full height, as I used in 
the above example, works between 51% and 71% of the time, depending on 
market conditions (bull or bear). 

Cut the height in half and the measure rule works better, but the poten- 
tial profit is less. Use a taller height, and the rule won’t work as often, but when 
it does, you have the opportunity to make more. 


Table 39.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 505 or 16% 94 or 15% 
Single bust count 238 or 47% 75 or 80% 
Double bust count 181 or 36% 10 or 11% 
Triple+ bust count 86 or 17% 9 or 10% 
Performance for all busted patterns -13% -19% 
Single busted performance -22% -23% 


Non-busted performance (head-and-shoulders tops) -16% -24% 


Trading Tactics 597 


Table 39.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the pattern’s height by subtracting the value of the lowest 
low reached in the head from the neckline, measured vertically. Add 
the difference to the breakout price. The result is the target price. 

For up-sloping necklines, use a close above the right armpit as the 
breakout price. The bottom portion of the table shows how often the 
measure rule works. 


Wait for It’s always best to wait for price to confirm the pattern. Wait for an 
confirmation upward breakout. 
Watch If you miss the upward breakout, wait. The majority of the time, the 


for throwback stock will throw back to the neckline. Once it does, buy the stock or 
add to your position. 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 86% 74% 
Percentage reaching full height target 71% 51% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 50% 26% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 38% 15% 


Once you know how far price might rise, check Table 39.3 to see if it’s 
realistic. In our example, the target is 4.37 away in a stock trading at 15.88 
for a value of 27.5% (or 4.37/15.88). Table 39.3 says that 50% (interpolating 
between 25% and 30%) of the patterns in bull markets will fail to see price rise 
more than 27.5%. That’s a high failure rate. 

Wait for confirmation. Wait for price to close above a down-sloping 
neckline or above the right armpit before trading. That is always the safe play. 
If you don’t wait for confirmation, there’s a chance price will break out down- 
ward instead of upward. 

Watch for throwback. Since a throwback occurs frequently (see 
‘Table 39.4), if you miss the breakout, you may have another chance to invest 
or trade the pattern. Buy once price resumes its upward trend after the throw- 
back completes. 

Table 39.11 shows special features of the head-and-shoulders pattern. 
However, I don’t include bear market statistics because they show no perfor- 
mance advantage. 

Neckline slope. Head-and-shoulders patterns with down-sloping neck- 
lines performed slightly better than up-sloping ones. 

Shoulder lows. “Left shoulder above right.” I am comparing the lowest 
price in each shoulder. When the left shoulder bottomed above the right, the 
average rise after the breakout was 43%. When the left shoulder bottomed 
below the right, performance improved, to 47%. 


598 


Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 


Table 39.11 
Special Features 

Description Bull Market 
Neckline slopes up, performance 44% 
Neckline slopes down, performance 46% 

Left shoulder above right, performance 43% 

Left shoulder below right, performance 47% 
Experience 


I have traded this chart pattern a lot over the decades. I looked through most 
of my trades and found these common elements. 


Do buy in early (at the breakout and not much later). Place a buy stop 
at the neckline or right armpit. That means you get in on time, at the 
breakout. If the breakout has already happened, then wait for a throw- 
back for a better entry price. 

Don’t attempt to buy before confirmation. You'll likely suffer a loss 
when the pattern doesn’t confirm. I tried this a few times and made a 
significant amount of money, but it’s risky. 

Five percent failures happen fast, usually in a week or two. Do place 
a stop below the right shoulder low. That will act as a tourniquet and 
stop the bleeding. 

Price moves up for about 2 months, but this range varies from 1 month 
to 3 months. That’s the time to exit a swing trade. It likely won’t be 
the ultimate high, but there seems to be a pattern to this, where price 
spikes 2 months after the breakout. In eight trades, five of them peaked 
in 2 months, two in 1 month and one in 3 months. If the stock looks to 
be peaking around the 2 months mark, then do your research and see 
if it’s time to exit with a profit. 


Sample Trade 


Some people might consider Bob unlucky, but he has an adoring wife and two 
children. Employed as a blue-collar worker in a nearby auto plant, he is happy 
when he is working. Unfortunately, strikes by the union have taken their toll 
on his savings, and he has been looking for ways to supplement his income. 

“Ever since I was a boy, P’ve been fascinated by Wall Street. I wanted to 
play the stock market, and when I saw the head-and-shoulders bottom pic- 
tured in Figure 39.6, I took the plunge.” He bought the stock at $16, the day 
after price pushed through the neckline. 


Sample Trade 599 


-21 
- 20 


Broadening 
Top 17 


Lyf re -15 
1 i 

j Left if! -14 
i Shoulder Common Support Level 


Shoulder 


Alaska Air Group Inc (Air Transport, NYSE, ALK) 


Target Price — 


Throwback 


Neckline 
Breakout 


Sep 94 Oct Nov Dec Jan95 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 39.6 A head-and-shoulders bottom. Compute the measure rule by sub- 
tracting the lowest low from the neckline vertically to find the formation height. 
Add the height to the breakout price. The result is the target price to which the 
stock may climb. A broadening top appears in July, near the target. 


For over a week, the stock did fine. Price slowly moved up and reached 
a high of 16.63, then reversed. The stock threw back to the neckline and con- 
tinued lower. Suddenly, he was losing money. “Should I sell and take a loss or 
hang on because I knew the stock was going higher? That question kept me 
awake at night.” 

He decided to tough it out. The stock bottomed at 14.50 and quickly 
recovered. It reached a higher high and then moved sideways for over a month, 
drifting slightly lower. “I wasn’t worried because I was making money now, not 
a lot, but some. I was sleeping better, too.” 

During the summer, things heated up for the airline and the stock took 
off. Almost on a daily basis, it flew higher, making new highs. A bearish broad- 
ening top appeared, but Bob did not know about such things. He felt giddy 
in the thin atmosphere in which the stock was flying. The stock entered the 
clouds at 21.38. 

When the airline stock hit turbulence in mid-September and headed for 
the ground, “I couldn’t believe it. All I could do was watch my profit spin lower 
like the stock’s altimeter. So I talked it over with my wife, and we decided to 
hold on. It'll come back to its old high, and when it does, [’ll sell it.” 

The stock continued down. Soon, his profits gone, he was posting losses. 
He maintained his firm stance that he would not sell until the price climbed 
back to the old level. 


600 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms 


During October, things changed (not shown). The stock pulled up just 
before nosing into the ground, at 13.63, and not only leveled out, but started 
climbing again. In a month he was at breakeven. 

At the start of the new year, a descending broadening wedge took price 
lower as it widened but turned out to be a bullish omen. In mid-January, on 
unremarkable volume, the stock turned the corner. Volume climbed, helping 
price reach a higher altitude. 

As the stock closed in on his target of 21.38, “I called my broker and 
placed an order to sell at 21.38.” In late February, the stock began a straight 
line run. It soared through 21.38, hitting his sell order, but kept climbing. In 
just over a month it reached 30. 

Bob blushed and admitted, “I no longer invest in stocks.” 


40 


Head-and-Shoulders 
Bottoms, Complex 


TTF ie 


I i 
|! 
S 


| I! 
| I | I)! lil 
gs iyh Ss 
H 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: An inverted head-and-shoulders pattern with multiple heads, multiple 
shoulders, or both. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term Intermediate-term 
bullish reversal bullish reversal 
Performance rank 9 out of 39 6 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 7% 12% 
Average rise 47% 32% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Throwbacks 66% 67% 
Percentage meeting price target 71% 45% 
See also Cup with handle; head-and-shoulders bottoms; 


rounding bottoms, triple bottom 


I find that a complex head-and-shoulders bottom (which I refer to as a 
complex bottom in this chapter) is more difficult to recognize than a normal 
head-and-shoulders bottom but not alarmingly so. If you can locate a normal 
head-and-shoulders bottom, then there is a decent chance that you are also 


601 


602 = Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 


looking at a complex one. If you look to the left and right of the two shoulders, 
you might see additional shoulders. Multiple shoulders are one indication of a 
complex bottom. Before I delve too far into pattern recognition, let me review 
the important snapshot statistics. 

The complex head-and-shoulders bottom is a strong performer with a 
low breakeven failure rate (ranking third out of 39 in bull markets when a rank 
of 1 has the lowest failure rate) and a very good average gain after the break- 
out. Volume typically slopes downward, and about two-thirds of patterns have 
throwbacks to the breakout price. 

Let’s see what these chart patterns look like. 


Tour 


There are two types of complex head-and-shoulders bottoms: those with mul- 
tiple shoulders and those with multiple heads. I can’t recall seeing a head-and- 
shoulders bottom with multiple heads and multiple shoulders, but I’m sure 
they exist. 

Consider the chart in Figure 40.1, which shows a complex bottom. The 
chart pattern has two left shoulders, a single head, and two right shoulders. If 
you were scanning your charts for normal head-and-shoulders bottoms, this 
one would probably pop up on your radar. The left and right shoulders are 
well defined, and the head is below them. As you widen your view, you see an 


Unocal Corp (Petroleum (Producing), NYSE, UCL) 
— 32 


—31 
—30 
—29 


I 
NS 


ly Neckline ih, | -—27 


nt i -26 
jill Al im i rl A \ =e 


Right Throwback 


hh 


i i 


ih 


Hh 


Left la 
Shoulder 


rh ih il mh Shoulder — 24 


li Right — 23 
Left Shoulder 
Shoulder Head — 22 


Sep 92 Oct Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 40.1 A dual-shoulder complex head-and-shoulders bottom. Notice the 
horizontal neckline and throwback to it. The formation is part of a rounding bot- 
tom chart pattern. 


Tour 603 


additional pair of shoulders; the left shoulder is about the same distance from 
the head as the right one. The two outermost shoulders are near the same price 
level, too. 

Looking at all the shoulders and the head together, the chart is a good 
example of a complex head-and-shoulders bottom. However, the volume pat- 
tern is unusual because it is heavier on the right than on the left. Most of the 
time, the left shoulders show higher volume than the right ones. 

If you ignore the various labels, you can see a rounding bottom. The 
gentle turn of price (if you connect the minor lows) supports a bottom pattern. 
However you choose to classify this pattern, the bullish reversal is clear. 

A throwback appears in March when the stock returns to the neckline. 
Although it takes a week or two before price really begins moving up, the stock 
climbs to a high of 32.63 before retracing its gains. 

Compare Figure 40.1 with Figure 40.2, a complex bottom with two 
heads. Overall, the chart pattern is quite symmetrical. There are two shoul- 
ders and two heads. A neckline connects the highs in the pattern and projects 
forward in time until price closes above it. The penetration of the neckline is 
the breakout point. Notice how flat (almost horizontal) the neckline appears. 
A near-horizontal neckline is a feature you can look for when prospecting for 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms. The regular head-and-shoulders tend 
to have steeper necklines than the complex variety. Figure 40.1 also shows a 
horizontal neckline. 

In Figure 40.2, the breakout in mid-November quickly throws back to 
the neckline and price moves lower for a week or two. This is not a good 


Charming Shoppes (Retail (Special Lines), NASDAQ, CHRS) 


-17 
i -16 
th '|- 15 
i I, "! W -14 

I n 
-13 
null, | oe Ah r o 

H | (Wh | Neckline Pi ua il i 

II qn i Mh fly r anh 
il Hm Lh Lal ye as 
Left Shoulder ne Head Right Shoulder -9 


Jul 91 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 40.2 A dual-head reversal. Volume on the left side of the pattern is higher 
than on the right. 


604 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 


example of a throwback because price didn’t rise far enough to show whites- 
pace between the stock and the neckline. Figure 40.1 shows a better example 
of a throwback where price lifts off, curls around, and returns to the neckline, 
leaving behind a white hole inside the looping price movement. 

In Figure 40.2, by late March the stock reached a high of 16.63, well 
above the head low of 9.19. Volume on the left side of the chart pattern is 
heavier than on the right. In this regard, the pattern is more typical than that 
shown in Figure 40.1. 


Identification Guidelines 


Are there certain characteristics that make complex bottoms easy to identify? 
Yes, and I outline them in Table 40.1. 

Appearance. As discussed before, there are two general types of complex 
head-and-shoulders bottoms: those with multiple shoulders and those with 
multiple heads (rarely do you have both). Figure 40.3 shows a complex bot- 
tom with multiple shoulders. The head is slightly below the shoulders but far 
enough below to distinguish the chart pattern from a triple bottom. 


Table 40.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A head-and-shoulders bottom with multiple shoulders, multiple heads, 
or (rarely) both. The head is lower than the shoulders but generally 
not by very much. 


Symmetry The tendency for the shoulders to mirror themselves about the head is 
strong. The price level of the shoulders and time distance from the 
shoulder to head is about the same on either side of the head. The 
shoulders also appear to be the same shape: Narrow or wide shoul- 
ders on the left mirror the right. 


Volume Usually higher on the left side than the corresponding shoulders on the 
right. Overall, the volume trend recedes. Volume is usually highest 
on the head. 

Near horizontal | Connects the highest rise on the left and right of the head(s). Many, 

neckline but not all, complex bottoms have near-horizontal necklines. Be 


suspicious of patterns with steep necklines: They may not be valid 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms. 


Breakout A breakout occurs when price closes above the down-sloping neckline. 
direction For those cases with an up-sloping neckline, use the highest price 
between the head and rightmost shoulder as the breakout price. The 
breakout is always upward. 


Confirmation The pattern confirms as valid when price breaks out upward. If price 
first closes below the bottom of the head, then it’s not a valid com- 
plex head-and-shoulders bottom. 


Identification Guidelines 605 


Echlin, Inc. (Auto Parts (Replacement), NYSE, ECH) 4 
» 7 


i inl, ~ 30 
-29 
id [ . 


Ij = 
| | I}! 27 
| i Mn | 


Hl Neckline 
jl | I 
all if My ah Fy 
i ' | AT i ith -24 
nl ! - 23 


| 
| ae nT a Hos s rae 


Right Right 
Shoulder Shoulder Shoulder Shoulder —21 


- 26 
-25 


; jilt 


-20 
qe! 


-19 


-18 


-17 
Nov 92 Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 40.3. A complex head-and-shoulders consolidation. The trend resumes 
moving up once the formation completes. 


Symmetry. In this case, there is a normal head-and-shoulders bottom 
flanked by an additional pair of shoulders. The overall pattern appears sym- 
metrical. The two left shoulders match the two on the right in distance. In this 
example, the two right shoulders are higher than their corresponding left ones. 
However, do look for symmetry between the shoulders, both in time and price. 

Volume. The figure shows the typical volume pattern: The two left shoul- 
ders show higher volume than the two right ones. Overall, volume recedes 
over the length of the chart pattern. 

Near horizontal neckline. The neckline connects the highest peak to 
the left of the head(s) with the highest peak to the right of the head(s). Most 
of the time the neckline is horizontal or nearly so. Many of the patterns shown 
in this chapter have near-horizontal necklines. If you see a steep neckline, then 
recheck your work to make sure you’re looking at a valid complex bottom. 

Breakout direction. For those patterns with up-sloping necklines, use 
the highest high on the right side of the head(s) in the complex bottom as the 
breakout price. Using a steep up-sloping neckline to gauge the breakout means 
price may never close above the neckline (or price will rise too far to trigger 
an entry). 

For down-sloping necklines, a close above the neckline signals a breakout. 
If price closes below the bottom of the pattern before breaking out upward, 
then it invalidates the pattern. Head-and-shoulders bottom patterns do not 
break out downward. 

Quite often, price throws back to the neckline and perhaps moves lower 
before resuming the upward trend. Figure 40.2 shows an example of this 


606 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 


behavior during November and even in late December. The December move 
saw price plunge from a high of 11.50 to 9.44, a decline of almost 20% in just 
2 days! When the decline ended, price recovered quickly. 

Confirmation. Price must break out upward. If it does not, then you 
don’t have a complex head-and-shoulders bottom. 


Focus on Failures 


If making money in the stock market is important to you, it pays to study your 
failures. The lessons learned will serve you for many years. When you look at 
your failures as a group, you may begin to see trends. 

Figure 40.4 shows a typical failure of a complex bottom to reverse the 
downtrend. After the head-and-shoulders completed, price did climb, but only 
to 57.13. Price inched above the neckline and closed there for just a handful 
of days before sliding below the neckline in early March. Ultimately, the stock 
reached 40.63 in August (not shown). 

The left shoulder showed tremendous volume. Volume diminished at the 
dual heads, and the right shoulder showed even less volume. Breakout volume 
was anemic and may explain why the pattern failed. 

If price fails to rise more than 5% after the breakout, before closing 
below the bottom of the complex bottom, then it’s a failure. Figure 40.4, for 
example, is a 5% failure. The breakout was upward, but price failed to climb 


IBM (Computers & Peripherals, NYSE, IBM) 
t ‘ 
Mwy - 87 
Ih a 
u 
Mn -79 


| -73 

Haty Hl thy . ee 
qt WM " ‘| 

I! ha! -63 

| -59 


Neckline 1 -57 
mr Te MN th =33 
|" WP at ral Ty -51 


\ ii 
Left Shoulder tf wl) al yt hull, I - 49 
i hl lt Right Ne de 
Shoulder 


Dual Heads 


Sep 92 Oct Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 40.4 A failure of the complex head-and-shoulders pattern to climb more 
than 5% after an upward breakout. Just 7% of the formations fail in this manner 
(bull market only). 


Statistics 607 


far before reversing direction. Once price closed below the head, I knew that 
there was no hope and marked the pattern a failure. 

I found no reliable clues that would indicate an eventual failure of a com- 
plex head-and-shoulders bottom. 


Statistics 


Table 40.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,196 patterns in 667 stocks starting from July 
1991 to October 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some no 
longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Complex bottoms have 
price dropping into the pattern and rising out of it, so all of them act as reversals. 

Average rise. The average rise in bull markets is 47%, a good showing 
(which is why the pattern ranks as high as it does, 9 out of 39). In bear markets, 
when price breaks out upward, the move is like swimming against the current, 
and the rise averages less: 32%. However, both numbers are above the average 
of all chart pattern types. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In bull markets, a big showing by the 
S&P helped stocks climb. In bear markets, the help was almost negligible. 
Using the dates of the breakout to the ultimate high of the complex bottom, 
the rise in the index falls far short of the move in the chart pattern. 

Days to ultimate high. It took almost three times as long for price to 
reach the ultimate high in bull markets than in bear markets. When you com- 
pute the velocity (47% rise in 278 days versus a rise of 32% in 96 days), we see 
that the bear market rise is twice as fast as the bull market one. 

How many change trend? This table row is a count of how many pat- 
terns see price climb more than 20% after the breakout. I consider values 
above 50% to be good. The bull market certainly exceeds that, and the bear 
market almost does. Nice job, guys! 

Table 40.3 shows failure rates. As far as failures go, complex bottoms 
keep them small. Between 7% (bull market) and 12% (bear market) of the 


Table 40.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 933 263 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average rise 47% 32% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 15% 1% 
Days to ultimate high 278 96 


How many change trend? 64% 49% 


608 —Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 


patterns I looked at failed to rise more than 5% (the breakeven rate). Half the 
patterns failed to rise more than about 30% after bull market breakouts (20% 
in bear markets). 

As you scan down the columns, notice how quickly the failure rate climbs 
as the maximum price rise increases. In bull markets, at the 10% maximum 
price rise, the failure rate is 20%—almost triple the prior row. For the 15% 
price rise level, the failure rate is more than four times the breakeven rate. 

How is this information useful? Imagine that the measure rule predicts 
a rise to 37.50 from 30, a climb of 7.5 points or 25%. In bull markets, we see 
that 43% of complex bottoms will fail to see price exceed a 25% rise. In bear 
markets it’s even worse, with 62% failing to exceed the target. Such big failure 
rates may make you adjust your expectations. 

Table 40.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition the breakout is always up. If price 
breaks out downward first (by closing below the bottom of the pattern), then 
it’s not a valid complex bottom. 

Yearly position, performance. The best performing complex bottoms 
vary depending on market conditions. In bull markets, for example, the best 
performing break out in the middle third of the yearly high-low price range. 

In bear markets, those within a third of the yearly low do best. 

I think the bull market results are suspicious. Rarely do patterns in the 
middle range perform well, but complex bottoms show an exception. 

Throwbacks. A throwback occurs in about two-thirds of the complex 
bottoms. Price breaks out upward, peaks in an average of 6 days, and returns to 
the breakout price for a round-trip of 12 days. 

When a throwback occurs, performance suffers. That may surprise you, 
but it is common for chart patterns. My thinking is that a throwback robs 
upward momentum. The key is to search for overhead resistance before trad- 
ing and to avoid it when possible. 


Table 40.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 62 or 7% 32 or 12% 
10 123 or 20% 41 or 28% 
15 98 or 30% 38 or 42% 
20 57 or 36% 24 or 51% 
25 63 or 43% 27 or 62% 
30 72 or 51% 18 or 68% 
35 62 or 58% 12 or 73% 
50 121 or 71% 29 or 84% 
75 111 or 82% 17 or 90% 


Over 75 164 or 100% 25 or 100% 


Table 40.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Statistics 609 


Bear Market 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


100% up 
L 46%, M 49%, 
H 46% 


100% up 
L 36%, M 30%, 
H 29% 


Throwbacks occurrence 66% 67% 
Average time to throwback peaks 6% in 6 days 8% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 46% 29% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 50% 37% 
Percentage price resumes trend 82% 69% 
Performance with breakout day gap 54% 24% 
Performance without breakout day gap 45% 34% 
Average gap size $0.36 $0.39 


After a throwback completes, price resumes rising most of the time. 

Gaps. A gap that occurs during the breakout tends to push price higher 
but only in bull markets. In bear markets, the results reverse with complex bot- 
toms without gaps showing better performance. 

Table 40.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. I measured the 
height of patterns from the highest peak to the lowest valley and divided by 
their respective breakout prices. Values above the median saw better perfor- 
mance that did those below the median. 

Width. Width is not as good a predictor of future performance as height. 
The table shows that the results vary depending on whether it’s a bull or bear 
market. To determine whether a pattern was narrow or wide, I compared it to 
the median width. 

Height and width combinations. The performance of the combina- 
tions of height and width tracks the results found earlier. By that, I mean bull 
market patterns that performed best when tall and best when wide saw the 
best performance if the complex bottom was both tall and wide. Similarly, bear 
market patterns show the best performance if they are both tall and narrow, 
matching their individual traits of height and width. 

You'll want to avoid trading short/narrow patterns in bull markets and 
short/wide ones in bear markets. 

Table 40.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. I found volume trends downward using linear regression 
on volume from the leftmost shoulder to the rightmost one. 


610 —Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 


Table 40.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 49% 36% 
Short pattern performance 45% 27% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 15.3% 23.1% 
Narrow pattern performance 44% 35% 
Wide pattern performance 50% 28% 
Median width 62 days 63 days 
Short and narrow performance 43% 30% 
Short and wide performance 47% 23% 
Tall and wide performance 51% 31% 
Tall and narrow performance 46% 43% 
Table 40.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 65% down 64% down 
Rising volume trend performance 53% 37% 
Falling volume trend performance 44% 29% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 48% 33% 
Light breakout volume performance 45% 29% 


Rising/Falling volume. Patterns with a rising volume trend outperform 
those with a falling volume trend. 

Breakout day volume. Both bull and bear markets show better perfor- 
mance when the breakout occurs on heavy volume (above the 30-day average). 

I don’t show Table 40.7 because I haven’t taught my computer how to 
estimate it for this chart pattern. 

Table 40.8 shows the performance over three decades. I don’t include 
bear markets because they happened in the 2000s only. 

Performance over time. Performance of the complex bottom has 
improved over the decades. This is one of the few times I’ve seen a consistent 
performance improvement over the years. 

Failures over time. Failures peaked in the 2000s, but I don’t know 
why that is. 

Table 40.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Few complex bottoms bust, which is good news 
if you buy long and expect price to continue rising. 


Trading Tactics 611 


Table 40.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 41% 
2000s 46% 
2010s 61% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 5% 
2000s 9% 
2010s 7% 
Table 40.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 112 or 12% 43 or 16% 
Single bust count 64 or 57% 34 or 79% 
Double bust count 31 or 28% 8 or 19% 
Triple+ bust count 17 or 15% 1 or 2% 
Performance for all busted patterns -14% -21% 
Single busted performance -21% -24% 
Non-busted performance -17% -23% 


(complex head-and-shoulders tops) 


Busted occurrence. I sorted busted patterns into their types: single, 
double, and more than two busts (triple+). Most of the patterns will single bust 
with double busts placing second. That may sound obvious and logical, but I’ve 
seen a number of chart patterns with triple+ placing second. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compare the performance 
of busted patterns with complex head-and-shoulders tops as a proxy for non- 
busted complex bottoms. Single busted patterns outperform the others I tested. 
The catch to this is that you have to be lucky enough to trade a single busted 
pattern and not some other type (double or triple+). 


Trading Tactics 


Table 40.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule sets a target for price to reach 
and is best explained by an example. Figure 41.5 shows a complex head-and- 
shoulders bottom on the weekly scale with the head reaching a low of 13.50. 
Directly above that point, the neckline has a value of 18.63. The difference, 


612 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 


Table 40.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Compute the formation height by subtracting the lowest low 


reached in the head(s) from the neckline, measured vertically. Add 
the result to the breakout price to get a target. The lower portion 
of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Trade inner head- Trade the inner head-and-shoulders bottom. That approach will 
and-shoulders allow you to get in at a good price. See the chapter on head-and- 
shoulders bottoms for specific trading hints. 


Stop location Stocks sometimes decline to the lowest of the right shoulders then 
turn around. Look for support areas near the shoulders. Place a 
stop-loss order 15 cents below the lowest right shoulder or head. 


Watch Buy or add to the position during a throwback. Wait for price to fin- 
for throwback ish falling before placing the trade as price sometimes throws back 
and continues moving down. 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 88% 72% 
Percentage reaching full height target 71% 45% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 50% 24% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 38% 14% 


5.13, is the formation height. Add the difference to the breakout price (17) to 
get the target (22.13). 

The chart shows a complex head-and-shoulders bottom that forms 
after nearly a 2-year run-up in price. The formation marks a reversal of the 
6-month retrace. 

It took price just 2 weeks after the breakout to reach the target, but the 
stock was not done climbing. It moved sideways for almost a year before con- 
tinuing higher. The stock reached a high of 39.38, nearly triple the head low of 
13.50 and more than double the breakout price. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches a target 
using various heights. The prior example used the full height. In bull markets, 
that method works 71% of the time. For a closer target, divide the height in 
half and add it to the breakout price. That method works 88% of the time, 
on average. 

For a check of the results, run it by Table 40.3. The height is 5.13, and 
let’s assume the current price is 17, so the height as a percentage of the current 
price is 30%. Table 40.3 says that 51% of the patterns in bull markets will fail 
to see price rise more than 30%. That value helps put the anticipated rise into 
better perspective. 

Trade inner head and shoulders. Since a head-and-shoulders chart pat- 
tern is part of the larger complex pattern, then trade the inner pattern. Buy 


Experience 613 


when price pierces a down-sloping neckline or use the inner right shoulder 
high (the armpit) as the breakout price. Usually, this approach will get you in 
sooner and the signal is just as strong. 

Stop location. Before you take a position in the stock, consider the 
stop-loss location. Many times the various shoulder troughs will act as sup- 
port levels. Don’t forget to change the potential loss into a percentage of 
the buy price (or anticipated breakout price). Many traders try to limit 
losses to 8%. 

Watch for throwback. After an upward breakout, the stock will likely 
throw back to the neckline. Consider adding to your position or placing a long 
trade once price stops declining. You should wait for price to rebound on a 
throwback or else you could find yourself in a situation similar to that shown 
in Figure 40.2. Price throws back to the neckline and then continues down for 
over a week. Depending on when you bought the stock, you could have seen a 
near 10% price improvement if you had waited a few days. 

Table 40.11 shows special features of the complex head-and-shoulders 
bottom. 

Neckline slope. The best performance comes from patterns with down- 
sloping necklines. Draw a neckline atop the highs of the chart pattern. When 
the neckline slopes downward, a close above it signals a breakout and a valid 
head-and-shoulders pattern. It allows you to buy into the pattern at a lower 
price than waiting for price to climb above the highest high. 

When the neckline tilts upward, the buy signal may never occur. Instead 
wait for price to close above the highest high between the nearest head and 
right shoulder. 

Shoulder lows. I compared the lowest left shoulder low to the lowest 
right shoulder low. Performance improved only in bear markets when the left 
shoulder was below the right one. 


Experience 


I prefer to trade regular head-and-shoulders bottoms instead of the complex 
variety. Over the decades, I made only two trades in complex bottoms. 


Table 40.11 
Special Features 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Neckline slopes up, performance 45% 29% 
Neckline slopes down, performance 49% 33% 
Left shoulder above right, performance 47% 29% 


Left shoulder below right, performance 47% 33% 


614 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 


Big Lots 


The first trade was in Big Lots (BIG) in 2004, shown in Figure 40.5. 

After peaking in 2003, the stock began to slide and formed a complex 
head-and-shoulders bottom during the summer of 2004. I show that with two 
left shoulders (S), a central head (H), and two right shoulders (S). The neckline 
sloped downward, as the chart shows. 

The breakout was upward (at A) and looked normal, but breakout volume 
was weak. I considered placing a stop below the right shoulder low but felt that 
location was too close (the first S in September). 

I scored the chart pattern using my scoring system (see Trading Classic 
Chart Patterns, Wiley, 2002), and it was —2. Scores below 0 tend to underperform. 


* Lesson: If the scoring system has a score of 0 or below, either decide to 
abandon the trade or monitor it carefully. 


The stock climbed to B and threw back to the breakout price at C. On 
that day I bought and made an entry near the day’s low. Yippee! 

I used lots of technical evidence to support an upward move in the com- 
ing days, including hope that this would bust a downward breakout from a 
large symmetrical triangle I saw on the weekly scale. I threw in some indi- 
cators, too (MACD, Bollinger bands, Fibonacci retraces and extensions, all 
of which I no longer use). The busted downward breakout from the weekly 
triangle didn’t happen. 

Price in the complex head-and-shoulders bottom continued lower. I sold 
at D and lost 7%. 


Big Lots Inc. (BIG) 


04 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan0O5 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 40.5 This trade in a triple busted complex head-and-shoulders bottom 
lost money because price continued down after a throwback. 


Sample Trade 615 


At E, the stock busted the upward breakout when it closed below the head 
low. The stock didn’t drop more than 10% before reversing and closing above 
the top of the chart pattern. That happened at F, and it busted the head-and- 
shoulders for the second time. The stock continued to move sideways until 
May 2006, busting the pattern for the third time along the way. 

This entry was bad timing on the throwback. 


¢ Lesson: A good way to prevent buying too early after a throwback (when 
price is still dropping) is to wait for price to break out upward again. 


That means waiting for price to rise back above a down-sloping neckline or 
above the right armpit high (when the neckline slopes upward). Had I done 
that, I would have entered the stock when price was rising (at G), not falling. 
Because the stock wobbled sideways, I don’t think it would have changed 
a losing trade into a winning one, but at least I would have corrected a 
bad entry. 


Chemtura 


The second trade was in Chemtura (CEM) in 2008. I bought in after the sec- 
ond right shoulder was in place but well before confirmation. I put a stop 
below the right shoulder. The stock spiked down 2 days later and hit my stop. 
I lost 6% on the trade. 

Six percent in 2 days: I really dislike losing money so fast. The complex 
bottom never confirmed, and the stock dropped from my sale price of 6.96 to 
9 cents before I stopped following the stock. 


¢ Lesson: Wait for confirmation. I didn’t and suffered a loss. 


Sample Trade 


When the weather is nice, I like to take my bicycle out for a spin and give 
the automobile drivers something to aim for. On one of my bike trips I met 
Melody. After I told her what I did for a living, she confessed that she was a 
nightclub dancer and made oodles in tips. I was unsure whether I bought her 
story, but she looked pretty enough (wearing a bike helmet and sun glasses, 
who can tell?). 

Anyway, Figure 40.6 shows a trade she made in the stock. “I liked the 
setup because a trendline drawn from the high in early October 1993 to just 
after the head marked a turning point. That is where price moved up enough 
to pierce the trendline.” 

Melody knew that price usually retests the low before beginning an 
extended move upward, so she followed the stock and watched it loop around 


616 Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex 


Allen Telecom Inc. (Telecom. Equipment, NYSE, ALN) 


| 37 
hy | - 
py 
| | -29 

Hid F -27 
i! | i | ee 
a Target Price =" i I ih | We 

! I|,-21 
a ' ] | | 19 

M a aa r 
Ih a Mt Shoulder — I" I, if _n " ; i 2 a 
a i Left Shoulder 1, "> Right a “a 


peti 


92ASOND93FMAM] JASOND94 FMAMJ JASOND9ISFMAMJ JA SOND96FM 


Figure 40.6 Complex head-and-shoulders bottom on a weekly scale. For a price 
target compute the pattern’s height from the head low to the neckline (vertically) 
and add the difference to the breakout price. The right shoulders often offer sup- 
port during future declines. 


and dip to 14. Then she glanced sideways and noticed the other dip at 14.38. 
“That’s when I found the (inner) head-and-shoulders bottom.” 

A neckline connecting the rises between the two shoulders was impos- 
sibly steep; there was no way she could apply the traditional measure rule to 
determine a target price (because price had not closed above the neckline), so 
she decided to buy into the stock when price closed above the right shoulder 
high (armpit). 

She bought in late May 1994 and received a fill at 17.50. 

“I wondered if another pair of shoulders would appear. They did.” Dur- 
ing late July, another shoulder appeared at 15.75, mirroring the one in mid- 
December 1993 (the outer pair of shoulders). 

Soon, price began moving up. It climbed above the breakout price in 
mid-August. Now she was able to apply the measure rule for the complex bot- 
tom and found the target was 22.13. 

“T didn’t need the money immediately, so I held onto the shares as price 
climbed. I thought the stock had enough momentum to reach the old high at 
29.25, so that became my target. As long as I didn’t lose money, I was happy to 
hold onto the stock.” 

She saw the stock building a base between 21 and 26 and wondered what 
to make of it. A downward breakout was a real possibility, so she raised her stop 
to 21, and at a price just below where the base was building. 


Sample Trade 617 


In mid-June, just over a year after she placed the trade, price zoomed 
up and reached her sell target. The stock sold at 29, “which was fine with me 
because I needed the money for a down payment on a house.” 

I was so engrossed with her story and the way she told it that I didn’t 
realize she had dismounted from her bicycle. She spoke of going back to her 
place, of making some new chart patterns, and then playfully thrust her hips 
into mine. 

I fell off my bicycle. 


41 


Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


H 


LS | RS 
iM 4 7 il 
ee 
\! ul 7 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A three-peak pattern with the center peak taller than the others, resem- 
bling a person’s head and shoulders. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term 

bearish reversal bearish reversal 
Performance rank 9 out of 36 4 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 19% 5% 
Average decline 16% 24% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 68% 67% 
Percentage meeting 51% 55% 

price target 

See also Head-and-shoulders tops, complex, triple top 


Of all the chart patterns in this book, the head-and-shoulders top is perhaps 
the most popular. In bear markets, performance shines with just 5% of the pat- 
terns failing to drop more than 5% after the breakout, and the average decline 
measures a large 24%, above the 22% average for all chart pattern types. The 
performance rank reflects this, too. Traders not versed in chart patterns can 
guess what a head-and-shoulders top looks like and get it right. 


618 


Tour 619 


Tour 


Figure 41.1 shows an example of a head-and-shoulders top. The three bumps 
are clearly visible, with the center bump being the highest of the three. The 
left shoulder usually appears after an extended uphill run. The entire pattern 
seems to stand alone when viewed in the context of a year’s worth of daily price 
data. This stand-alone characteristic makes the head-and-shoulders top easily 
identified in a historical price series. 

‘Typically, the highest volume occurs during the left shoulder, then the 
head, and then the right shoulder, in that order. The identification guidelines 
are flexible because volume characteristics vary from pattern to pattern. 

A trendline drawn along the bottoms of the two valleys between the 
three peaks forms the neckline. The line may slope in any direction but slopes 
upward a bit more than downward. 

Why do these chart patterns form? Pretend for a moment that you are a 
big spender and represent what is commonly called the smart money. You are 
searching for a stock to buy and believe that Toll Brothers (Figure 41.2) repre- 
sents an intriguing situation. You review the fundamentals and everything looks 
good, so you start buying the stock in mid-July as price descends (before the rise 
to the left shoulder). Your buying halts the drop and the stock begins rising. 

Soon you have acquired all the stock you want, so you sit back and wait. 
As expected, the company issues good news and the stock begins making its 
move. Other investors jump into the game and buy the stock, sending the price 
higher. As the stock rises above 10, you decide it is time to sell. After all, you 


Great Atlantic and Pacific (Grocery, NYSE, GAP) 
Head 


Pesty | Right ee 
ape | i Ir Shoulder mi 
Shoulder | | h ~ . 
Ih | Pullback = - 
il ill | -29 
hy # Neckline ane In ' _28 
t |, -27 
if Ry i =e 
oe 
: \ Head t : 2 
inal aii l erie -23 
i Right ~ 22 
Shoulder 21 


Mar 93 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 41.1 A head-and-shoulders top pattern where the center peak towers 
above the other two. A pullback to the neckline occurs frequently. 


620 —Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


Toll Brothers (Homebuilding, NYSE, TOL) 


Head 


Right 
Left 

-11 
Shoulder i Snouldes 


II 
| h 


|! 


1] Support Level 


Neckline 


tl, 


ft Lia" ity i 
‘hy _ 


| Left 


Shoulder Right 


use Shoulder 


Jun 92 Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 41.2 Volume pattern of this head-and-shoulders top obeys the general 
characteristics: highest on formation of the left shoulder and weakest on the right 
shoulder. The down-sloping neckline suggests an especially weak situation. 


have made 20% in about 2 weeks. Your selling causes the stock to pause and 
then begin a retrace of the prior action. This forms the right shoulder. 

Sensing weakness in the stock, you stop selling and monitor the situa- 
tion closely. Other momentum and buy-the-dip players, believing that this is a 
chance to get in on the ground floor of a further advance, buy the stock on the 
retrace. The decline halts, and the stock begins rising again. 

As it rises, additional momentum players make a bid for the stock or buy 
it outright. Once the stock gets above 10, you begin selling it again, not heavily 
at first because you have a large number of shares to dump. Still, the market 
players notice your selling, and the stock climbs just above 11 before heading 
back down. This buying and selling forms the head of a head-and-shoulders 
pattern on the chart. 

You dump your remaining shares as the stock begins tumbling. Volume 
rises as other players sell their shares to unsuspecting buyers. The stock con- 
tinues moving down and slides back below 10. Believing the stock oversold, 
demand picks up and sends the price moving up again for the last time, form- 
ing the right shoulder. 

You watch the action from the sidelines, content with the profit you have 
made. The stock climbs to 10.75 on the right shoulder. Lacking support, the 
rise falters on weak volume and the stock turns down. Investors versed in tech- 
nical analysis see the head-and-shoulders top for what it is: a bearish reversal. 
They quietly take their profits and sell the stock. Others initiate short sales by 
selling high and hoping price falls. 


Identification Guidelines 621 


The stock moves down to the support level where it declined the last 
time. The stock pauses there for a week and makes a feeble effort to rise again. 
When the attempt falters, the stock moves down and pierces the neckline. Vol- 
ume picks up, and the stock tumbles. Eventually, price declines back to where 
it began, just under 8. 


Identification Guidelines 


Are there certain guidelines that make identifying a head-and-shoulders top 
easy? Yes, and Table 41.1 lists them. Remember that the identification guide- 
lines are suggestions, not hard rules, so be flexible. Use the figures in this 
chapter as guidance on what to look for. 

Appearance. A head-and-shoulders top pattern can appear in a wide variety 
of shapes. Consider Figure 41.3. Shown is a head-and-shoulders top, but there 
are four shoulders and only one head. When a pattern appears with more than 
the standard two shoulders and one centrally located head, it is called a complex 
head-and-shoulders top. Complex patterns for both tops and bottoms have their 
own chapters, but because a complex head-and-shoulders top also contains a 
(simple) head-and-shoulders top, many appear in this chapter’s statistics. 

The head-and-shoulders top usually appears at the end of a long uptrend. 
Sometimes, when the prior uptrend is short, the reversal takes price down to 


Table 41.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance After an upward price trend, the chart pattern appears as three bumps; 
the center one is the tallest, resembling a bust. Be wary of patterns 
with uneven shoulders or long necks. 


Symmetry The two shoulders should appear at about the same price. Distance 
from the shoulders to the head is approximately the same. There can 
be wide variation in the pattern’s appearance, but symmetry is usually 
a good clue to the validity of the pattern. 


Volume Highest on the left shoulder, followed by the head. The right shoulder 
shows the lowest volume of the three peaks. Don’t discard a pattern 
because of an unusual volume pattern. 

Neckline Connects the lows of the two troughs (armpits) between the three 


peaks. The line can slope up or down. Often used as a trigger (to buy 
or sell) once price closes below the line. 


Breakout Downward. For up-sloping necklines, use a close below the line. 
direction For down-sloping necklines, use a close below the right armpit as 
the breakout. 
Confirmation Price confirms the pattern after a downward breakout. If price breaks 


out upward, then you don’t have a valid head-and-shoulders top. 


622 —Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


Toys R Us (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, TOY) 


-42 
Head 
Right Shoulder =4) 
Left Shoulder ihn, / Right Shoulder _40 


Left Shoulder 


/ : 
| I, 14 Pullback 7 
i Dog ila” 
aif Hytut "yp iF \ f= 


} -35 
- 34 
| {hl Left Shoulder Right Shoulder 
i Left Shoulder . — 33 
i | ~~ Right Shoulder 
; I 7 
That 2 
i -31 
- 30 
-29 


Jun 92 Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 41.3. A complex head-and-shoulders top pattern. The chart shows the 
wide variation that a head-and-shoulders formation can take. 


where it started the climb (see Figure 41.2, the launch price at about 8.00). At 
other times, the decline is usually short (up to 3 months) or intermediate (3 to 
6 months), or can signal a change in the primary bullish trend. 

Look for two shoulders that peak below the top of a central peak. That 
central peak is the head. 

Symmetry. Even though the pattern shown in Figure 41.3 is odd because 
of the extra shoulders, it does appear symmetrical. The two left shoulders are 
at about the same price level as the corresponding two right shoulders. Each 
of the shoulders is approximately the same distance from the other and from 
its mirror opposite. In the chart pattern, the head is centrally located. The 
symmetrical appearance of a head-and-shoulders top is one of its key identi- 
fication characteristics and helps separate any three bumps from a valid head- 
and-shoulders chart pattern. 

Let’s ignore the two outer shoulders and concentrate on the two inner 
shoulders and the head. Those three make up the head-and-shoulders top 
chart pattern. 

Volume. Volume obeys the following general characteristic: It is higher 
on the left shoulder than on the head, and higher on the head than on the 
right shoulder. The volume pattern changes somewhat since the left shoulder 
has diminished volume compared to the head. Even so, the volume on the left 
shoulder is still above the right shoulder. Don’t let an unusual volume pattern 
persuade you to ignore a head-and-shoulders top. Volume isn’t important to 
performance. [’ll prove that in Table 41.6. 

Neckline. The neckline, as shown in Figure 41.3, connects the two 
troughs between the three inner peaks (the armpits). The neckline slopes 


Focus on Failures 623 


upward but need not do so (contrast with Figure 41.2). The neckline serves 
as confirmation. Once price closes below the neckline, it turns squiggles on a 
price chart into a valid chart pattern. 

Breakout direction. The breakout is always downward. A breakout 
occurs when price closes below an up-sloping neckline or below the right 
armpit (the lowest low between the head and right shoulder) if the neckline 
slopes downward. The reason for the armpit rule is to avoid situations like 
that shown in Figure 41.2. The neckline slopes downward, and if it were steep 
enough, you might not get a breakout. (The figure does show a breakout, but 
it’s well below the armpit signal, shown here as Support Level.) 

Confirmation. Price must break out downward, either by closing below 
the neckline or below the right armpit, to confirm the head-and-shoulders top 
as a valid chart pattern. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 41.4 shows an example of a head-and-shoulders top failure. This well- 
formed pattern has a head centrally located between two shoulders. The left 
and right shoulders are at the same price level, 29.13. Volume is highest on the 
left shoulder and lowest on the right, as expected. 

Why does price fail to pierce the neckline at point A and head down? The 
answer is not clear. The formation is perfect except that price fails to drop. 
This example acts as a consolidation or continuation of the upward trend. 


Hughes Supply Inc (Retail Building Supply, NYSE, HUG) 


| -35 
| 34 
| - 33 
— 32 
Head i | =o) 
Left Right tir _ 30 
Shoulder | +] Shoulder | | I lel 5 
Hil t 
a Pl 
J wl] ot I, i F — 28 
I = |! |, -27 
a Left Shoulder A 
| - 26 
i i Head Right Shoulder ~25 
ot -24 
wre aoe 
Nov 95 Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 41.4 A rare head-and-shoulders consolidation. The pattern fails to 
continue down after reaching point A. Symmetry and volume patterns offer no 
clue to the eventual failure to confirm as a valid head-and-shoulders top. 


624 Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


Not shown in the figure, the prior two chart patterns were descending 
triangles. Both had upward breakouts, and both signaled a bullish uptrend. 
The two patterns were clues to the strength of the rise, but one could also 
argue that the appearance of a head-and-shoulders pattern might signal an end 
to the extended rise. 

It did not. 

This chart also shows an example of a down-sloping neckline that did not 
signal a trade entry this time (which is a good thing in this case). Using a close 
below the right armpit would serve as a better entry signal in most cases. The 
right armpit is at 9.09, and point A closes at 9.09. Technically that’s not a close 
below the armpit, and it’s certainly not below the neckline, so it doesn’t trigger 
a breakout. However, the low in March has a closing price at 8.97, which is 
below the right armpit, so the breakout happens there. However, price does 
rise above the right shoulder between A and the March low, so I’d probably 
throw out the pattern because of that rise anyway. 

In bull markets, you'll see price fail to drop more than 5% below the 
breakout price 19% of the time. I’ll discuss failure rates in Table 41.3. 


Statistics 


Table 41.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. Over several decades of cataloging chart patterns, I 
found 3,577 head-and-shoulder tops in 1,067 stocks, with the first pattern hid- 
ing in July 1991 and the most recent in October 2018. Not all stocks covered 
the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. A head-and-shoulders top 
is a reversal by definition. Price enters the pattern from the bottom and breaks 
out downward. Thus, price reverses the uptrend. 

Average decline. In bear markets, this pattern does well, with declines 
averaging 23.7%. That’s better than the average decline of 22.2% for bear- 
ish chart patterns of all types. Bull markets are slightly ahead of the overall 


Table 41.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 2,847 730 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average decline -16% -24% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -2% -11% 
Days to ultimate low 58 43 


How many change trend? 29% 52% 


Statistics 625 


average, too, 16.1% (head-and-shoulders) versus 14.9% (for all pattern types). 
You'll notice I rounded off the numbers in the table, so don’t be alarmed. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The decline in the general market 
helped pull down stocks showing head-and-shoulders tops. That’s especially 
effective in bear markets, where the S&P dropped 11%. However, that average 
drop is less than half what the chart pattern did over the same measurement 
periods (breakout to ultimate low). 

Days to ultimate low. It takes about 2 months for price to reach the 
ultimate low. Notice that the decline is farther (price) and shorter (time) in 
bear markets than in bull markets. Thus, the decline must be steeper in bear 
markets. In fact, the drop happens twice as fast as it rises. 

How many change trend? This item is a count of how many patterns see 
price move more than 20% after the breakout. I like to see values above 50%, 
but that’s for upward breakouts. Even though price drops in bear markets, we 
still see 52% making such large drops. That’s terrific. 

Table 41.3 shows failure rates. The best performance is from head-and- 
shoulders tops in bear markets because they have the lowest failure rates. For 
example, 5% of the patterns fail to see price drop more than 5%. Another 
example: Nearly half (48%) fail to see price drop more than 20% in bear mar- 
kets. That performance is even worse in bull markets when 71% of them fail 
to drop more than 20%. 

Notice how failure rates climb for small changes in the maximum price 
decline. The rate triples and then almost doubles as the decline moves from 
5% to 15% (bear markets). The numbers should serve as a warning that as reli- 
able as a head-and-shoulders pattern is, not all patterns perform equally well. 
Monitor your trade and use stops to limit losses. As price drops, trail the stop 
lower if you are so inclined. 


Table 41.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 536 or 19% 38 or 5% 
10 617 or 40% 96 or 18% 
15 493 or 58% 109 or 33% 
20 362 or 71% 110 or 48% 
25 239 or 79% 82 or 60% 
30 184 or 85% 78 or 70% 
35 148 or 91% 59 or 78% 
50 204 or 98% 116 or 94% 
75 63 or 100% 42 or 100% 


Over 75 1 or 100% 0 or 100% 


626 —Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


Another way to use Table 41.3 is with price prediction. Suppose the 
measure rule (see Trading Tactics) suggests a decline to 8 from the breakout of 
10. That is a 20% decline. How many head-and-shoulders tops in bull markets 
will fail to see price drop more than 20%? Answer: 71%. This finding suggests 
the measure rule prediction is unlikely to be met. Set a closer price target. 
Price may still drop that far or even farther, but the odds are against it. 

Table 41.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is downward all of the 
time. If price closes above the top of the head-and-shoulders top, then you 
don’t have a valid head-and-shoulders pattern. 

Yearly position, performance. The best performing patterns occur 
when the breakout is in the middle of the yearly trading range. However, the 
performance differences are slight so they might not be statistically significant. 

Pullbacks. Pullbacks occur about two-thirds of the time. It takes less 
than 2 weeks after the breakout for price to complete the return trip back 
to the breakout price. When a pullback does occur, performance suffers, and 
quite dramatically. For example, in bear markets, patterns with pullbacks drop 
22% after the breakout. Without pullbacks, the drop measures 28%. 

After the pullback completes, price resumes the downward move 58% of 
the time. To flip this around, it means 42% of the time (of those patterns hav- 
ing a pullback), the ultimate low appears as price drops before beginning its 
return to the breakout price. 


Table 41.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-16%, M-17%, L -23%, M -24%, 

12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H-15% H -24% 
Pullback occurrence 68% 67% 
Average time to pullback bottoms -6% in 6 days -10% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -15% -22% 
Average decline for patterns without -19% -28% 

pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 58% 58% 
Performance with breakout day gap -16% -22% 
Performance without breakout day gap -16% -24% 


Average gap size $0.59 $0.78 


Statistics 627 


Gaps. In bear markets, on average, you see the best performance (to the 
ultimate low) if price does mot gap on the breakout day. That’s contrary to 
technical analysis lore, which says heavy breakout volume is important to per- 
formance. In this case, and in many other chart pattern examples, volume is not 
as important as people think. 

Table 41.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Do tall patterns perform better than short ones? Yes. The widest 
difference is in bull markets where price drops 19% for tall patterns but just 
13% for short ones. I measured height from the highest high to the lowest low 
in the pattern (starting from the left shoulder peak to the right shoulder peak) 
and then divided by the breakout price. Those patterns with values higher than 
the median shown in the table were tall. 

Width. Width is less reliable as a performance indicator than height. I 
used the median time from shoulder to shoulder to gauge width. As the table 
shows, there’s no consistent trend from bull to bear markets (wide works best 
in bull markets, but narrow patterns outperform in bear markets). 

Height and width combinations. The results say that tall patterns out- 
perform. Avoid short ones. 

Table 41.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend, breakout performance. Volume trends downward 
between the two shoulders most of the time, but if you see a head-and- 
shoulders with an upward volume trend, it’s fine. As the performance statistics 
show, volume has little to do with performance. 

Table 41.7 is not shown because the nature of the pattern doesn’t lend 
itself to finding stop locations automatically. 

Table 41.8 shows the performance over three decades 


Table 41.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -19% -24% 
Short pattern performance -13% -23% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 12.5% 18.8% 
Narrow pattern performance -15% -24% 
Wide pattern performance -17% -23% 
Median width 36 days 37 days 
Short and narrow performance -13% -23% 
Short and wide performance -14% -23% 
Tall and wide performance -19% -24% 


Tall and narrow performance -19% -25% 


628 — Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


Table 41.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 61% down 58% down 
Rising volume trend performance -16% -24% 
Falling volume trend performance -16% -23% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -16% -23% 
Light breakout volume performance -16% -24% 

Table 41.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -20% 
2000s -14% 
2010s -15% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 10% 
2000s 23% 
2010s 23% 

Table 41.9 

Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 899 or 32% 72 or 10% 
Single bust count 600 or 67% 300r42% 
Double bust count 30 or 3% 4 or 6% 
Triple+ bust count 269 or 30% «38 0r 53% 
Performance for all busted patterns 35% 16% 
Single busted performance 67% 34% 
Non-busted performance (head-and-shoulder bottoms) 45% 28% 


Performance over time. Performance was best in the 1990s and about 
even performance since then. 

Failures over time. Failures have increased since the 1990s, as the table 
shows. I think that the increase in failures mirrors the performance drop of the 
pattern since the 1990s. 

Table 41.9 show busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. The table shows how many patterns bust. In 
bear markets, few do, but bull markets show triple the bear market number. 


Trading Tactics 629 


It means that if you expect a large decline (more than 10%) after a downward 
breakout, you'll be wrong about a third of the time in bull markets. 

Busted occurrence. Sorting the busted patterns by their type, we find 
that single busts happen most often in bull markets, but triple (or more: tri- 
ple+) busts happen more often in bear markets. That’s probably incorrect 
because the sample size is so small (38 patterns for triple busts, 30 for single, 
and 4 for double). 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used head-and-shoulders bot- 
toms as the proxy for a busted top pattern. Single busted patterns outperformed 
the other two varieties. The numbers are high enough that you'll want to trade 
a busted head-and-shoulders top, but only in bull markets. And with 67% of 
them single busts, there’s a good chance that you'll be trading a single busted 
pattern, too. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 41.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Figure 41.5 shows an example of the measure 
rule as it applies to a head-and-shoulders top. If you ignore the backward 
volume pattern, the formation looks fine. Each of the three bumps appears 
rounded, and the overall chart pattern is symmetrical. This is how a head-and- 
shoulders top should look. 


Table 41.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height by subtracting the value of the neck- 
line from the highest high reached in the head, measured vertically. 
Subtract the result from the breakout price. If the neckline slopes 
downward, use a close below the right armpit as the breakout price. 
The result is the target price. The bottom portion of the table shows 
how often various heights work in the measure rule. 


Wait for Wait for price to confirm the pattern by closing below the neckline or 
confirmation right armpit. 


Busted pattern A single busted head-and-shoulders top can lead to a meaningful rise. 
See the discussion for Table 41.9 for guidance. 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 77% 80% 
Percentage reaching full height target 51% 55% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 25% 29% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 12% 15% 


630 —Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


Arco Chemical Co (Chemical Basic), NYSE, RCM) 


Head 
ih Right 
Left Shoulder —~50 


— i i Vp y ui hn, m0 
i | if Neckline oe 
a -47 


i tl L H" | 
ull I ven lhe 


Target Price 


Jul 94 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar 


Figure 41.5 The measure rule as it applies to a head-and-shoulders top. Calcu- 
late the formation height by subtracting the neckline price from the highest high, 
measured vertically. Subtract the result from the breakout price. The result is the 
target price. 


The measure rule uses the formation height as a basis for computing 
a target price. Use the target price as a gauge to determine how far price 
might drop. 

Subtract the high price at the top of the head from the neckline, measur- 
ing vertically down until it intersects the neckline. The result gives the pat- 
tern’s height. Subtract the height from the breakout price to get a target. 

In the figure, the stock reaches a high price of 51 on 13 September. 
Directly below that point is the neckline price at about 47.38. The difference 
of 3.62 is the formation height. 

The opening price the day after the breakout is 47.38 (same as in the 
neckline in this example), leaving a target price of 47.38-3.62 or 43.76. Price 
surpasses the target when it declines below the value in late December. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often various heights used in 
the computation work. In the above example, I used the pattern’s full height. 
The table shows the full height works about half the time, so you might want 
to cut the height in half to boost the probability of success. 

Once you know the target, use ‘Table 41.3 to see if the predicted percent- 
age decline is unrealistic for the number of failures which occur. 

Wait for confirmation. Returning to Table 41.10, since anything can 
happen, it is always a good idea to wait for confirmation before selling an exist- 
ing holding or shorting a new position. There is a chance price will not close 
below the breakout price before rising, so you'll want to wait for confirmation 
(a breakout). 


Experience 631 


Busted pattern. Single busted head-and-shoulders tops in bull markets 
can lead to large gains, so consider finding and trading one of those. 


Experience 


In the 1990s, I sold a number of times before the head-and-shoulders con- 
firmed as a valid chart pattern (often before the right shoulder appeared). In 
four trades, the stocks saw additional gains, but most were small. In one case, 
however, I missed out on a 44% rise. In other words, just the potential threat of 
a head-and-shoulders top sent me scurrying for the exits, leaving behind profit. 


Michaels Stores 


In Michaels Stores (MIK, 1998), I sold too soon, but it was near the top, so it 
didn’t matter too much. 


Graco 


In Graco (GGG, 2003), I bought an earnings flag that later formed a head- 
and-shoulders top. I sold when the pattern confirmed as a valid pattern, but the 
pattern triple busted and went on to gain 53%. Ouch. 


Pinnacle West Capital Corp. 


Pinnacle West Capital Corp. (PNW), Figure 41.6, shows an example of how 
I used to trade head-and-shoulders tops. In mid-October 2008, I bought the 
stock but don’t have any notes for this entry except to say that I was averaging 
down. My spreadsheet of trades calls it a perfect entry, maybe because of the 
big downward price spike that I was able to bite into. 

The stock was trading at the time in the 2007 to 2009 bear market, which 
ended at the March 2009 low. Four days after the stock bottomed in March, I 
bought more. Now that was a perfect entry. 


¢ Lesson: Buy close to the end of a bear market to reap big rewards. 


Anyway, fast-forward to the head-and-shoulders top, which I show as 
turns CDE. The stock closed below the bottom of the pattern at G (a lit- 
tle black nubbin below the horizontal confirmation line), staging a down- 
ward breakout. 

The next day, F, I sold the stock. Here’s my notebook of the sale: “28 
April 2010. Sell reason: Head-and-shoulders top. This has moved horizontally 
since March and has pierced support with a closing black marubozu candle. 


632 —Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


Pinnacle West Capotal Corp (PNW) 


22 
08 Nov Dec Jan09 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan1@Feb Mar Apr May Jun jul 


Figure 41.6 Bulkowski avoided watching profit disappear when this head-and- 
shoulders appeared. 


That suggests more down move ahead. Since this is near my 39 price target, 
I’m selling the earliest and higher priced shares. This also matches Weinstein’s 
sell technique of tightening up the top when price moves horizontally. This is 
a good opportunity to reduce my utility holdings for diversification because as 
a group, I’m too concentrated in them. CCI [commodity channel index] says 
sell yesterday both on a crossover of the two lines and it sank below the 0 line. 
I’m toying with selling the entire position but believe this has more upside to 
it. So, Pll hold onto the rest. Price has closed below the neckline of a HST 
[head-and-shoulders top], too.” 

I sold and made 41% on the trade, but that includes dividends that can 
be hefty from a utility stock. I sold at 37.26 and avoided the one-day plunge to 
32.31,a drop 13% below my sale price. I was right to hang onto the remainder 
of my position, though. It peaked at 73.31 in January 2015 when it reached the 
ultimate high. That’s double what I sold part of my position for. 


¢ Lesson: Sometimes a bearish pattern in a bull market doesn’t send 
price much lower. 


iShares U.S. Basic Materials 


Twice I traded busted head-and-shoulders tops with disappointing results. 
I jumped into iShares U.S. Basic Materials ETF (YM), an exchange-traded 
fund, as it materialized out of the 2009 bear market and sold it almost a year 
later. If I had traded it perfectly, I would have made 33%. Instead I sold at the 


Sample Trade 633 


exact bottom of a retrace, the day before the fund started its long recovery. I 
made a small profit but missed out as the fund soared. 
Don’t you hate it when you sell before a security rises? 


Brooks Automation 


In the second case, Brooks Automation (BRKS) in 2005, the head-and- 
shoulders never confirmed as a valid pattern, so there was no downward break- 
out to bust. Even so, the stock closed above the top of the pattern and climbed 
18%. I was stopped out along the way for a small gain but hoped the stock 
would deliver more. 


Wex Inc. 


In one trade, Wex Inc. (WEX) in 2019, I sold 4 months before the stock cra- 
tered by 70% during the Covid-19 pandemic. Thank goodness I sidestepped 
that drop. 


¢ Lesson: Don’t try to guess that a head-and-shoulders top will appear. 
Either it confirms or it doesn’t, so don’t exit prematurely. 

¢ Lesson: If you do see a head-and-shoulders confirm, then assess how 
bad the drop will be. In my case, I sold quickly and avoided big losses, 
multiple times. 

¢ Lesson: With busted head-and-shoulders tops, wait for a valid pattern 
to appear and then make a realistic assessment of how far price might 
rise. Then give it a try if it’s worth the risk. 


Sample Trade 


Kelly is not just a housewife; she is much more than that. When her husband 
brings home the bacon, she not only fries it but cleans up the mess afterward. 
She balances the books and keeps tabs on their newborn. 

She started investing years ago for fun. Now, it has become part of her 
daily life. In the spare moments between chores, she is often staring at the 
computer screen, reviewing the statistics of a prospective acquisition and let- 
ting her daughter bang on the keyboard. 

Over the years she has been able to parlay their meager savings into a 
six-figure retirement portfolio. It was not always easy, and the mistakes were 
painful, but she viewed each failure as a learning experience. 

The stock pictured in Figure 41.7 posed an interesting situation for her. 
She was not keen on shorting a stock because her paper trades rarely worked. 


634 —Head-and-Shoulders Tops 


Brinker International (Restaurant, NYSE, EAT) 


Left Head igh 
Shoulder ‘a sh oulek ee 
1 I h ae 
} l -31 
‘ A A | } u] =) 
at | 
ley {I 5 


Target Price ———— l 


Feb 94 Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 41.7 Head-and-shoulders top with steep neckline. There is no target price 
using the conventional measure rule because of the steep neckline. 


Still, she kept her eyes open and searched for good investment candidates. 
This one piqued her interest. 

The stock began its uphill run just before May 1993. It followed a gently 
sloping trendline upward until late January when it stumbled (not shown). The 
stock moved down to 26.50 before recovering, a drop of less than three points, 
but a sign of weakness. Kelly followed the stock closely, and when the head 
appeared, she made a note on her program that it might turn into a head-and- 
shoulders top. “It just had that certain feel.” She was correct. 

The right shoulder plunge took price lower than she expected but quickly 
recovered to near the left shoulder high. She drew a neckline connecting point 
Awith the steep plunge between the head and right shoulder, and thought the 
line was too steep to serve as an anchor for the measure rule. Instead, she used 
the height from the head to the right armpit projected downward from the 
armpit as the target. The target became 21.88. That target would take price 
back to the July 1993 level, and it seemed reasonable to her. 

“Something bothered me about the stock, so I decided not to trade it.” 
When the doorbell rang, she left her daughter alone to go answer it. 

Then the phone rang. It was her broker confirming that the stock sold 
short. Kelly ran to the computer to see her daughter standing on the chair, 
beating on the keyboard with a wide but guilty grin on her face. “I hoped it 
was gas, but it wasn’t. My daughter had sold the stock short at 31. I couldn’t 
believe it!” 


Sample Trade 635 


After spending some anxious moments reviewing the trade, Kelly decided 
to maintain the position. The number of shorted shares was just 100, an 
amount she could live with. Price quickly retreated to the neckline (mid-April) 
where it found support. The stock bounced, and when it moved above the 
right shoulder low, she became concerned. After a few days, the stock leveled 
out and moved sideways (going into May). In case this turned out to be the 
beginning of a measured move up, she placed an order to cover her trade at 
29. That would leave her with a small profit but still allow her to participate if 
the stock declined. 

‘Two weeks later, she had an answer. The stock tumbled for 5 days in a 
row and then just as quickly recovered (early to mid-May), only this time it 
formed a lower high. The volatility was wearing her down, so she placed an 
order with her broker to cover her position when price reached the early May 
low. She was taken out when price descended to 22.75 on their way down to 
20. After expenses, she made about 25% on the trade. Her daughter got a big 
kiss for her help. 


42 


Head-and-Shoulders Tops, 
Complex 


H H 
uel, + 
1 l I (hi, 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A head-and-shoulders formation with multiple heads, multiple shoulders, 
or both. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term 
bearish reversal bearish reversal 
Performance rank 7 out of 36 9 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 18% 7% 
Average decline 17% 23% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 66% 65% 
Percentage meeting 47% 46% 
price target 
See also Head-and-shoulders tops, rounding tops, triple tops 


Except for appearance, there is not much difference between a normal head- 
and-shoulders top and a complex one. Add a dual head or a few extra shoul- 
ders to a regular pattern, and you have a complex head-and-shoulders top. 
Both patterns have a volume trend that generally slopes downward between 


636 


Tour 637 


the shoulders. The left shoulders often have higher volume than the corre- 
sponding right ones. 

The performance rank is good: seventh and ninth where 1 is best. 
The breakeven failure rate in bear markets is quite good, too, ranking fifth 
(not shown). 

The measure rule doesn’t work all that well, about half the time as the 
table shows (percentage meeting price target). [ll show how to improve those 
percentages in Trading Tactics. 


Tour 


There are two basic varieties of complex head-and-shoulders tops (which I'll 
refer to as complex tops). The first is illustrated in Figure 42.1. It has two heads 
but only one pair of shoulders. The complex top started in November after an 
extended bull run that began in November 1992 (not shown) and then melted 
back by late October, forming a base for the move up to the complex top. 

The stock rebounded, creating the left shoulder. It paused at the 31-32 
level by moving sideways, and then price spiked upward again in a sort of 
measured move up (a chart pattern) thrust. The measured move up stopped 
short of its target price by just over a dollar before the stock began retracing. 
The peak served as the first head. 


Alcan Aluminium (Aluminum, NYSE, AL) _37 


i Head 
: Left Right 
Shoulder 


l Shoulder ~ 36 
| ig Head 


My 

\ | oF Right Extended 

| mae / Pullback i 1 _ 33 
: 


| si i MAK if i pe 
af - Wy : : 


- 28 


hy | 


-27 


- 26 
Aug 95 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 42.1 Complex head-and-shoulders top with dual heads. The stair-step 
pattern of a measured move up forms the left shoulder and head. The twin peaks 
take on the appearance of a horn top, and the resulting move down resembles 
another measured move, albeit stuttered. A simple head-and-shoulders appears 
in August. 


638 — Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 


After moving down a bit, the stock pushed upward and tagged the old 
high, then dropped. Another head appeared. Once price slipped from the head, 
it found traction at the first shoulder valley and rebounded. The right shoulder 
took shape. After declining through the neckline, formed by a line joining the 
two shoulder valleys, price quickly pulled back and moved higher. 

The stock turned away at the 32 resistance level and continued down ina 
straight-line run to 28.38. Notice that the stock bottomed near the price where 
it began (the launch price near 29, in late October). 

Computing the slope of a line using linear regression of volume over the 
pattern (outermost shoulder to shoulder) indicated volume receded. Although 
it is difficult to tell from the figure, almost two out of every three (61%) com- 
plex head-and-shoulders tops show a receding volume trend. 

Figure 42.2 shows a different type of complex head-and-shoulders top. 
Multiple shoulders with only one head is the more common of the two varie- 
ties. Pictured is the type of technical pattern that rips the heart out of novice 
investors. 

Imagine someone buying this stock in October, just before the rise began. 
Price quickly climbed from a low of about 13 to a high of 27.88, a doubling of 
price in a little over 3 months. On the way up, our novice investor thought that 
picking stocks was an easy game; his selections were turning to gold. 

The first shoulder formed when price touched 27.88 and retreated to a 
low of 22. The decline undoubtedly upset our investor pal. He promised that 
he would sell the stock once it returned to its old high. 


Thor Industries Inc. (Manuf. Housing/Rec. Veh., NYSE, THO) 


Left aon y Right Shoulder _29 
Left ~~ Right Shoulder 


iy -—27 


I" 4 -25 
|} 


ft 
} i i! ik 
oft b \, | 
iL 1 ! 
; Neckline ] _22 


\ : a 
aa : 
I, j = ; : 


{I 
nwt 
Ay i 


wel 


Oct 92 Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 42.2 Typical complex head-and-shoulders reversal. Multiple shoulders 
with a single head in a rather flat formation round out the pattern. The volume 
pattern emphasizes that volume is usually higher on the left side of the complex 
top than on the right. 


Identification Guidelines 639 


In early January, price zoomed up and made a smaller peak at 27.50. Since 
the rise was so steep, our intrepid investor thought, Why sell the stock when it is 
going up? He’s right. Price retraced a bit, moved higher, and formed the head at 
a price of 28.63, a higher high. Yippee! 

Once the head completed, things start going wrong for our buddy. He was 
swayed by glowing rumors of the stock moving up to 35 or 40 within a year. 

At the top, price rounded over and started down. It stopped midway 
between the valleys of the two left shoulders before making one final attempt 
at a new high. Up to this point, there were several opportunities to sell the 
stock at a good price. Did our novice investor take them? No. Always optimis- 
tic that price would ultimately break out and reach higher ground, he did not 
see the budding complex head-and-shoulders for what it was: a warning. 

When price dropped below the neckline, our novice investor had just 2 
days before things really got ugly. On the third day the stock closed at 23, near 
the low for the day. Price quickly unraveled and ultimately reached a low of 
15, just a few dollars above the purchase price. Our investor threw in the towel 
and sold the stock. Of course, this was near the low, and the stock ultimately 
climbed to 30 a year later. 


Identification Guidelines 


How can our novice investor recognize the bearish reversal? Table 42.1 out- 
lines identification tips for complex head-and-shoulders tops. 

Appearance. Consider Figure 42.3, which is another example of a mul- 
tiple shoulder complex top. After a decline from a head-and-shoulders pattern 
just off the left side of the chart (only the right shoulder appears in the figure), 
price declines until reaching bottom at the start of July. Then it rises and cre- 
ates a new head-and-shoulders pattern: a complex top. Admittedly, the higher 
two right shoulders are weak examples of shoulders. The minor highs are there 
but are not as pronounced as the corresponding pair to the left of the head. 

If you ignore the labels for a moment, the inner price action looks like a 
rounding top. This smooth price rollover is common for complex head-and- 
shoulders tops. 

Symmetry. You can divide Figure 42.3 into a pure head-and-shoulders 
top by ignoring the outer shoulders. For single-head patterns, this is the easi- 
est way to correctly identify a complex head-and-shoulders top. First locate a 
regular head-and-shoulders top and then expand your view to include addi- 
tional shoulders. 

In this example, the head pokes above the surrounding shoulders. The 
two shoulders are usually equidistant, or nearly so, from the head. The price 
level of the left and right shoulders is nearly the same. Thus, the symmetry of a 
complex top is more pronounced than that of a regular head-and-shoulders top. 


640 Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 


Table 42.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A head-and-shoulders top with multiple shoulders or, more rarely, two 
heads. The head is higher than the shoulders but generally not by 
very much. 

Symmetry The tendency for the shoulders to mirror themselves about the head is 


strong. The price level of the shoulders and time from the shoulder to 
head is about the same on either side of the head. The shoulders also 
appear to be the same shape: Narrow or wide shoulders on the left 
mirror those on the right. 


Volume Usually higher on the left side than on the right and usually seen when 
comparing the shoulders on the left with corresponding ones on the 
right. Overall, the volume trend recedes. 


Neckline Connects the lowest left shoulder valley with the lowest right shoulder 
valley. A close below the neckline signals a downward breakout. 
Breakout The breakout is always downward. For those cases with a steep, 
direction down-sloping neckline, use the lowest armpit on the right of the head 


as the breakout price. 


Confirmation The pattern confirms after a downward breakout. If price doesn’t 
breakout downward, then you don’t have a complex head-and- 
shoulders top. 


Brinker International (Restaurant, NYSE, EAT) 
i] _ Right Shoulder =33 


Left Shoulder Right Shoulder -29 
Left Shoulder Right Shoulder 


-27 
li, Left Shoulder 1 ‘ Head J aE 
I \ yen y Right Shoulder 1 7° 


Vy 
; th | hi 


| 
aa 
hi | 


y ti 2 
ry Milly -23 
j I i Hl Neckline I Kt —22 


r fy 


-17 
-16 
-15 


Apr 94 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 42.3 A more rounded-appearing complex head-and-shoulders top. Left 
shoulder 1 and right shoulder 1 could be considered part of a large head-and- 
shoulders top. The inner head-and-shoulders looks like a rounding top. 


Focus on Failures 641 


In a regular head-and-shoulders pattern, one shoulder may be higher in 
price than the other or one shoulder will be farther away from the head—a 
rather extended shoulder. That is usually not the case with the complex variety. 
Symmetry is a key identification element for a complex top. 

Moving to the outer shoulders, they also are equidistant from the head 
and are very nearly at the same price level as well. Continuing the symmetry 
example, the two peaks labeled left shoulder 1 and right shoulder 1 appear to be 
shoulders of the same pattern, although farther away than the inner grouping. 

Volume. If you could zoom in on the volume pattern, you would see it 
is marginally heavier on the left side of the pattern than on the right, at least 
for the pattern bounded by the inner (higher) neckline. High volume on the 
left side of the pattern as compared to the right is typical for complex tops and 
occurs about two-thirds of the time. 

Neckline and breakout direction. The neckline joins the lows of the 
lowest valleys and is interpreted the same way as a normal head-and-shoulders 
top. Once price closes below the neckline, a downward breakout occurs and 
price moves lower. Volume typically rises on a breakout day and can remain 
high for several days, depending on the severity of the situation. 

The breakout is always downward. Until price breaks out downward, you 
don’t have a valid complex head-and-shoulders top. 

Confirmation. The pattern confirms as a valid chart pattern when price 
closes below the neckline or right armpit. Until confirmation, the pattern is 
just squiggles on the chart. 


Focus on Failures 


Complex tops suffer two types of failures. Figure 42.4 shows the first type. 
I define a downward breakout as a close below the neckline, or in the case of 
steep necklines, a close below the lowest shoulder trough (armpit) to the right 
of the head(s). The figure shows price declining below the neckline only once 
on 8 May but closing above it. From that point, price rises and moves above 
the highest head and an upward breakout occurs. 

The pattern is well formed. It has two heads at about the same level and 
two shoulders also near the same price level. Symmetry throughout the pattern 
looks good, too, because the shoulders are equidistant from the head. Volume 
appears heavier on the left shoulder than on the right, as you would expect. Only 
during the decline from the right head to the right shoulder does volume rise. 
In short, there is no real indication that price will fail to continue moving down. 

Although this pattern has all the ingredients of a complex top, it’s not a 
valid complex head-and-shoulders top chart pattern (because it fails to confirm). 

Figure 42.5 shows a slightly different situation. The stock suffers a 1-day 
drop of $2 at the breakout but then rises in an ascending broadening wedge 


642 Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 


UAL Corp. (Air Transport, NYSE, UAL) 


Vhvatd - $8 
Head Head fice I ly TF -57 


hee | tl, I | |! Shoulder af il | I 
ie if" |! ‘i | I, 


t Neckli — 50 
3 Se Downward Breakout but — 49 


Price Closes Above 


M i Neckline _ 46 


i 


' gil IF 
by, : 40 


Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 42.4 A complex head-and-shoulders failure to reverse. Price fails to 
close below the neckline before moving above the pattern’s top and staging an 
upward breakout. 


Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing (Chemical (Diversified), NYSE, MMM) 


Left iia 1. Right Shoulder 
Left ee Pa Shoulder —37 


N wi HN : 


| lh h | Ascending 
| Broadening —55 
1 ih Wedge 
| | 

H 


KA. 
il PN 


Ih Nu 


i ri 


May 94 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb 


Figure 42.5 Another failure of a complex head-and-shoulders top. This one fails 
to decline more than 5% below the breakout point. An ascending broadening 
wedge takes shape in late November and December. 


pattern. The wedge is a bearish pattern that breaks out downward, but it, too, 
fails to see price descend far. Within a few months, the stock is again making 
new highs. 


Statistics 643 


I regard the complex top as a failure because price fails to drop more than 
5% after the breakout. 

Are there any clues to the failure of this chart pattern? The volume pat- 
tern is flat. It shows no tendency to diminish over time. A receding volume 
pattern is not a hard-and-fast rule, so I do not consider that to be unusual. To 
answer the question, a closer examination of the fundamentals on the company 
may provide some clues. Usually in cases like this, underlying support stops a 
down trend. The May-June broadening top represents a consolidation region 
that supported price in December. 


Statistics 


Table 42.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I located only 880 complex tops with the first in August 
1991 and the most recent in October 2019, in 581 stocks. Not all stocks cov- 
ered the entire span, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Since these patterns form 
at the top of an upward price trend with a downward breakout, they all act as 
reversals. 

Average decline. The decline from a complex top is quite good when 
compared to other bearish chart patterns. In bear markets, the decline averages 
23%, substantially above what we see in bull markets. That makes intuitive 
sense because the receding tide lowers all boats. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The table shows the influence of the 
general market on the average decline. If the general market is declining, find 
a bearish chart pattern. In a rising market, trade only bullish chart patterns for 
the highest rewards (trade with the trend). 

Days to ultimate low. It takes about 2 months or less for price to reach 
the ultimate low. Notice how the 42-day average decline in bear markets is less 
than the 59-day bull market number, yet price drops further. The bear market 


Table 42.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 651 229 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average decline -17% -23% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -2% -10% 
Days to ultimate low 59 42 


How many change trend? 32% 53% 


644 Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 


decline must be steeper to drop farther in a shorter time. In fact, the velocity 
in bear markets is almost twice as fast as in bull markets. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how often price declines by 
more than 20%. I consider values above 50% to be good (for upward break- 
outs), but this chart pattern beats the benchmark even though the breakout 
is downward. 

Table 42.3 lists failure rates. Complex tops have low failure rates (at the 
breakeven value) when compared to other chart patterns. In bear markets, just 
7% fail to see price drop more than 5% after the breakout. Almost half (47%) 
fail to drop more than 20%. 

Bull markets have substantially higher failure rates as the table shows. 

Notice how the failure rates rise for small maximum price declines. The 
bear market number rises from 7% and almost triples to 20% for a 5-percent- 
age-point rise in the maximum price decline. 

In bull markets, 55% of complex tops will fail to see price drop no more 
than 15%. That’s triple the breakeven failure rate (18%). 

Table 42.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout direction from a com- 
plex top is downward. No exceptions. If price breaks out upward first, then you 
have an invalid complex top. 

Yearly position, performance. Bearish patterns don’t do well with this 
item and complex tops are another example. Bull markets show better perfor- 
mance if the breakout is within a third of the yearly low. Bear markets do best 
in the middle range. However, the differences (for their respective market) are 
close, so I’m not convinced this is something you need to pay attention to. 

Pullbacks. Pullbacks occur about two-thirds of the time. 

It takes less than 2 weeks for price to return to the breakout price. When 
a pullback occurs, the eventual decline is less than if the pullback was absent. 


Table 42.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 118 or 18% 16 or 7% 
10 144 or 40% 30 or 20% 
15 94 or 55% 27 or 32% 
20 85 or 68% 34 or 47% 
25 59 or 77% 32 or 61% 
30 47 or 84% 28 or 73% 
35 39 or 90% 15 or 79% 
50 51 or 98% 38 or 96% 
75 13 or 100% 9 or 100% 


Over 75 1 or 100% 0 or 100% 


Statistics 645 


Table 42.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-18%, M-16%, L-21%, M -23%, 

12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H-16% H -22% 
Pullback occurrence 66% 65% 
Average time to pullback bottoms -6% in 6 days -11% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -16% -21% 
Average decline for patterns with- -18% -25% 

out pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 61% 50% 
Performance with breakout day gap -18% -23% 
Performance without breakout day gap -16% -22% 
Average gap size $0.55 $0.60 


Thus, for the best performance, look for underlying support and avoid trading 
a stock when support is nearby. 

Once a pullback completes, the stock resumes moving down between 
50% and 61% of the time. 

Gaps. Gaps help performance, but the performance difference isn’t 
substantial. 

Table 42.5 shows statistics related to pattern size. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. In bull markets we 
see the biggest difference: 20% versus 13%. Nice! In bear markets, the trend 
is similar but less startling. 

‘To determine short or tall, I measured the height of the pattern from 
highest peak (usually the head) to the lowest low and divided by the breakout 
price. If the result beat the median in the table, then the pattern was tall. 

Width. Wide patterns perform slightly better. I used the median width 
(not the average) to determine width. 

Height and width combinations. The combination of height and width 
yields results that make your head itch. Consider the bull market results. The 
numbers say that tall patterns outperform and wide patterns outperform. So 
you’d think that patterns both tall and wide, on average, would outperform. 
Nooo! Tall and narrow ones do best (but tall and wide is close). 

The bear market numbers are flubbed up, too. Clearly, though, avoid 
short and narrow patterns. They perform worst. 

Table 42.6 shows volume-related statistics. 


646 Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 


Table 42.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -20% -23% 
Short pattern performance -13% -22% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 15.4% 22.8% 
Narrow pattern performance -15% -22% 
Wide pattern performance -18% -23% 
Median width 60 days 61 days 
Short and narrow performance -13% -21% 
Short and wide performance -14% -24% 
Tall and wide performance -20% -22% 
Tall and narrow performance -21% -24% 
Table 42.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 61% down 61% down 
Rising volume trend performance -17% -23% 
Falling volume trend performance -17% -22% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -16% -23% 
Light breakout volume performance -17% -23% 


Volume trend. Volume trends downward most often, but don’t be sur- 
prised if you see it trending upward. Don’t throw away a pattern because it has 
an unusual volume pattern. 

Rising/Falling volume, breakout day volume. I lumped the next sev- 
eral rows together because the performance difference from row to row is 
minor. It’s not worth complaining about, which, oddly, is what ’m doing as I 
write this. 

Table 42.7 is supposed to show how often a stop triggers, but my com- 
puter wouldn’t cooperate with this pattern. I don’t show the table. 

Table 42.8 shows performance over three decades. It’s one of my favorite 
tables (don’t tell the other tables. They'll be jealous). Because the two bear 
markets occurred only in the 2000s, they are not included in the results. 

Performance over time. The 1990s did very well, and the 2000s did very 
poorly. The 2010s were in the middle. 


Statistics 647 


Table 42.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -20% 
2000s -13% 
2010s -16% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 10% 
2000s 25% 
2010s 23% 
Table 42.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 190 or 29% 23 or 10% 
Single bust count 120 or 63% 15 or 65% 
Double bust count 9 or 5% 0 or 0% 
Triple+ bust count 61 or 32% 8 or 35% 
Performance for all busted patterns 33% 26% 
Single busted performance 50% 38% 
Non-busted performance (complex head-and- 47% 32% 


shoulders bottoms) 


Failures over time. This is one of the few cases where performance 
matches the failure rate. For example, the 1990s had the best performance 
and lowest failure rate. The 2000s had the worst performance and the highest 
failures. That’s how it is supposed to be. It makes intuitive sense. 

Table 42.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Few complex tops bust, especially in bear mar- 
kets (just 23 did, too few to be worth discussing). 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the busted patterns into how often they 
busted. Single busts, as one would expect, happen most often. In second place 
are patterns that bust more than twice (triple+). Usually they are triple busts, 
but there must be a few four or five busts hidden in there. Double busts are rare. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared the performance of 
a complex head-and-shoulders bottom as a proxy for a non-busted complex top. 
Single busted complex tops perform better than the other two categories (“all 
busted patterns” and “non-busted” ones). 

However, you have to trade a single busted pattern, and even though they 
happen 63% of the time, that suggests you may be wrong almost a third of the 
time (meaning it’ll double or triple+ bust). 


648 Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 


Trading Tactics 


Table 42.10 presents the trading tactics for complex head-and-shoulders tops. 

Measure rule. Use the measure rule to help predict the expected decline. 
Look at Figure 42.6 as an example of how to use the measure rule. 

Compute the formation height by subtracting the difference between the 
highest high (31.63, head) from the value of the neckline directly below the 
highest high (27). Subtract the result (4.63) from the breakout price (25.75). 
Price drops below the target of 21.12 in early March. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works 
for various heights. In the above example, I used the pattern’s full height. Price 
will reach the target between 46% and 47% of the time on average. 

‘To improve the success rate of the measure rule, cut the height in half and 
use it in the measure rule. Using half the height works 72% of the time, but if 
price reaches the target and you cover a short there, profit will be less than if 
price dropped to a full height target. 


Table 42.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height by subtracting the neckline value from 
the highest high reached in the head, measured vertically. Subtract 
the result from the breakout price. The result is the target price. 
The bottom portion of the table shows how often the measure 
rule works. 


Launch price If the formation looks like a mountain suddenly appearing out of a flat 
plain, price may return to the launch price. Figures 42.2 and 42.5 
show examples. 


Wait for If a simple head-and-shoulders pattern confirms, consider trading it 
confirmation without waiting for the complex top to confirm. Place a short trade 
or sell any long commitments. This formation rarely disappoints, and 
the decline is above average. 


Stop location Look for resistance areas near the neckline. The shoulder tops and head 
also represent good locations for stop-loss orders. 

Busted trade See Table 42.9 for details. In bull markets, single busted patterns can be 
quite profitable. 

Tips See text. 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 

Percentage reaching half height target 72% 72% 

Percentage reaching full height target 47% 46% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 18% 18% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 8% 10% 


Trading Tactics 649 


For a check of how many patterns will fail to reach the target, convert the 
height of the pattern into a percentage of the current price (in our example, 
that’s 4.63/25.75 or 18%). Table 42.3 says that in bull markets, 68% will fail to 
see price drop more than 20% (the closest to our 18%). 

The large number suggests price might not decline as far as you expect. 

Launch price. Imagine a flat landscape with a hill in the middle of it. 
That hill represents the head-and-shoulders pattern. If you see that situation 
on a price chart, the stock might return to bottom just above the launch price 
(the price where the stock started its uphill run to the complex top). 

Figure 42.1 shows an example of this. Price started its move up to the 
left shoulder in late October, and when the complex top completed, the stock 
dropped and bottomed in mid-January near the launch price (about 29). 

Figure 42.2 shows another example. The launch price is about 14 or 15 in 
early November, and the stock returned there in June. 

What we’re seeing is price dropping until it finds support, like that shown 
in Figure 42.5, near 50, slightly above the launch price. 

Wait for confirmation. Since a simple head-and-shoulders pattern 
makes the core of a complex top, trade the inner head-and-shoulders. That 
strategy may allow you to place a trade sooner than waiting for price to close 
below the neckline or armpit of the complex top. For conservative investors, 
wait for the complex top to confirm. 

Consider selling a stock if the complex top confirms. In bull markets, a 
complex top will send price down farther than a simple head-and-shoulders 
top, but the differences are minor. 

Stop location. For short positions, look for areas of strength—overhead 
resistance—and place a stop-loss order just above that level. Common resist- 
ance levels are the shoulder valleys, shoulder tops, and head top. Should price 
close above the highest high in the complex top, cover the short, because price 
is likely to continue rising. 

Busted trade. If the stock drops no more than 10% after the breakout 
and then closes above the top of the complex top, consider buying the stock. 
In bull markets, single busted patterns happen 63% of the time and price rises 
an average of 50% (median: 36%) above the top of the complex top. That’s for 
a perfect trade, but you should be able to nibble off some of that move, and 
perhaps more. 

Tips. I have some tips I want to pass on from studying complex tops and 
other bearish patterns. 

If yow’re thinking of shorting a stock, look for a knot of support closest 
to the bottom of the complex top. In Figure 42.5, for example, it’s the sideways 
move in mid-July, just before price zips higher into the left shoulder. Look for 
at least 3 days of price moving sideways with lots of overlap. 

The first drop out of the complex top will find that knot and either stall 
there or turn into a pullback. But the top of that knot is your swing target. We 
see price return to the price of that knot in November and turn upward. The 


650 Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 


knot of support should be the first one be/ow the confirmation price. It makes 
for a great swing trading target. Chapter | gives a good tutorial on knots. 


¢ Look for knots close by. 


Here’s another tip: The figures in this book are nice-looking complex 
tops, many with straight-line runs leading to the start of the complex head- 
and-shoulders. However, what I’m seeing now, in the 2020s, looks like a slightly 
taller mountain in a mountain range. Thus, trying to pick how far price might 
drop is more difficult. 

The knot scenario described above still works, though. However, do look 
at prior peaks and valleys to assess how far price might drop. The peak or val- 
ley would be a location above the knot, so it would be a closer target. 


¢ Look for underlying support set up by prior peaks, valleys, and consoli- 
dation regions. 


If you do see a head-and-shoulders sitting atop a mountain with the hills 
far below, then expect a larger decline. These setups will be rare, but they are 
the ones that will make you the most money. Look at the run up to the com- 
plex top. If it’s a straight-line run, then perhaps price will return to bottom just 
above the launch price. Figure 42.2 shows the setup you’re looking for. 


¢ Sometimes a quick decline follows a quick rise. 


In many cases, I see a complex top forming at the end of a horizontal 
price move. That’s a number of peaks where price has moved sideways for a 
year or more. Perhaps it’s a function of bull markets, but complex tops in these 
patterns tend to bust. They confirm as valid complex head-and-shoulders tops, 
sure, but price reverses before reaching the bottom of that horizontal range. 
Price climbs and begins a new climb to the moon. Do not short these patterns. 

Avoid complex head-and-shoulders tops where the stock has moved hori- 
zontally for a year or more before the chart patterns begin. 

For all trades, place a stop above the right shoulder, or worst case, above 
the head. You don’t want a short sale to get away from you. 

Table 42.11 shows special features of the complex top. I removed bull 
market results because they showed little performance difference. 

Neckline slope. In bear markets, if the neckline slopes downward, 
price drops 24% compared to a drop of 21% if the neckline slopes upward. 
Cool beans! 

Shoulder highs. The results for this one are unexciting. I measured per- 
formance of complex tops by comparing the highest of the left shoulder with 
the highest right shoulder and checking performance. Patterns with a higher 
left shoulder result in better performance, but not so you’d notice. 


Sample Trade 651 


Table 42.11 
Special Features 

Description Bear Market 
Neckline slopes up, performance -21% 
Neckline slopes down, performance -24% 

Left shoulder above right, performance -23% 

Left shoulder below right, performance -22% 
Sample Trade 


Henry runs a small hedge fund. He considered buying into the stock shown in 
Figure 42.6, but needed more bullish evidence. In August 1994 (not shown), 
indicators he uses on a daily basis confirmed a buy signal, so he bought shares 
for his fund at an average price of 17.25. 

“In January 1995, I thought the end of the uptrend was coming, so I 
started looking at the fundamentals.” He was so engrossed with his research 
on the company that he failed to notice a pattern forming. Over drinks with 
his fund manager friends, he shared with them what he had dug up about the 
company. The news was not good. 

“So that’s why it’s making a broadening top!” one remarked. Henry fur- 
rowed his brow and pictured the price action in his mind, and there it was, a 
broadening top, just like his friend had said. 


Standard Microsystems Corp. (Computers & Peripherals, NASDAQ, SMSC) 


Left Shoulder Head Right Shoulder _32 
Left Shoulder X* / Right Shoulder 31 
- 30 
-29 
— 28 
—27 


h - 26 
A Zoom Out of the 25 


Broadening Top 24 
from December ~ 
to February ~ 23 
Long-Term -—22 
Trend Line Target Price -21 
Dead-Cat Bounce -—20 
-19 
18 


bya ot . ie 
“14 
-13 


-12 
Jan 95 Feb Mar Apr May 


— 


Figure 42.6 A complex head-and-shoulders top. For the measure rule, compute 
the difference between the highest high and the neckline, measured vertically, 
and subtract the result from the breakout price. A broadening top appears from 
December through February and a dead-cat bounce follows. 


652 Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex 


The next day Henry pulled up the chart and looked at it more closely. 
He saw higher highs and lower lows (see the zoom-out in Figure 42.6), char- 
acteristic of a broadening top. Coupled with his fundamental research on the 
company, he knew it was nearing time to sell, but not yet. He wanted to sell at 
the top, when price tagged the top trendline. 

In early February, when price attempted to reach the previous high, it fell 
short, dipped down for a few days, and tried again (the two right shoulders). 
The second rise was even shorter than the prior one, signaling weakness, so 
Henry started selling immediately. 

The failure of price to sail across the pattern and touch the top of the 
broadening formation meant it was a partial rise. A partial rise in a broadening 
top suggests a downward breakout will follow. 

By the time the stock pulled back up to the base of the two right shoul- 
ders (point B), Henry had sold his holdings. As he was getting ready to leave his 
office for home, something on his computer screen caught his eye. The broad- 
ening pattern had changed into a complex head-and-shoulders top. There 
were the two left shoulders balancing the two right ones with a head perched 
in the center. 

Henry discussed the new situation with his mentor and his fund manager 
buddies, and then decided to short the stock. By the time price reached the 
long-term up trendline, he had a tidy sum sold short. 

Two days later, price tumbled. It dropped 20% or $5 a share in 1 day and 
continued down. In less than a week, it was at 16 before finding some support, 
a plummet of 36%. 

Henry had studied the behavior of dead-cat bounces, and he pulled out 
his notes and brushed up. He knew the stock would bounce, usually within a 
week, and then trend lower. 

‘True to form, price moved up a bit (to 18.13), but it was not the smooth, 
rounded bounce he expected. In the coming days, price moved lower, so Henry 
quit complaining, but he watched the situation closely. 

The stock bottomed out at about 16 and trended horizontally. “It looked 
like the stock was building a base and preparing for an upward move, so I cov- 
ered half of the short position. In late April, when price jumped up to 18.50, I 
covered the remainder of the position. I made a chunk of change on that one.” 


43 


Horn Bottoms 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Two downward price spikes separated by a week on the weekly chart. 


Upward Breakouts 

Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish reversal Short-term 

bullish reversal 

Performance rank 2 out of 3 1 (best) out of 2 
Breakeven failure rate 6% 9% 
Average rise 59% 34% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Percentage meeting 74% 53% 


price target 


See also Double bottoms (all varieties of Adam and Eve), 
pipe bottoms 


I first discovered horn bottoms while pondering a result from my study of dou- 
ble bottoms. Double bottoms with bottoms closer together performed better 
than those spaced widely apart (because I did the study years ago, don’t take 
this as still valid). What would happen if you considered patterns that have 
bottoms only a week or so apart? I tested the idea and discovered that the chart 
pattern performs well. 


653 


654 Horn Bottoms 


All of the statistical results in this chapter use the weekly scale. Thus, the 
search for the ultimate high will result in larger values than if it is conducted 
on the daily scale. That’s because on the daily scale, price can close below the 
bottom of a pattern (forcing an end to the search for the ultimate high), but on 
the weekly scale, it might not (because the price bar uses the closing price at 
week’s end, which might remain above the pattern’s low). That allows trends to 
continue on the weekly scale, whereas on the daily, the trend would end. 

Because the results are different depending on the time scale, I don’t rank 
this pattern against other patterns that use the daily scale. However, I did rank 
them against pipes and diving boards, both of which use the weekly scale. 


Tour 


Figure 43.1 shows what a horn bottom looks like. After peaking in late Decem- 
ber 1993, price plummeted from a high of 50.75 to the horn low at a base of 
30.75. On the left side of the horn, price has a tall weekly price range of about 
$7. High volume makes the week appear like a one-week reversal (with the 
same attributes as a one-day reversal but over the course of a week), signaling 
a possible trend change. 

The following week, price closed lower but nowhere near the left horn 
low. Then, 1 week later, price spiked lower again but closed near the high 
for the week and just 13 cents below the prior close. The horn bottom was 
complete: A double price spike separated by 1 week marked the turning point. 


Tandy Corporation (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, TAN) 


i| = 

t Hately y “48 
Ht rene: 
Pye tpg a2 


I, T —34 
Horn Bottom =ae 


93 D 94 FM AM JJ AS ON D 95F MAM J J AS ON 


Figure 43.1 A good example of a horn bottom. Two downward price spikes, 
separated by a week, look like a steer’s horn flipped upside-down. 


Identification Guidelines 655 


From then on, price moved up and more than doubled from the horn low in 
about a year and a half. 


Identification Guidelines 


How do you correctly identify horn bottoms? Table 43.1 shows identification 
characteristics. 

Appearance. Horns are visible on weekly charts. Although they appear 
on daily charts, weekly charts make selection easier and performance more 
reliable. For the horn on the left in Figure 43.2, the chart shows two tall, 
downward price spikes separated by a week. The low of the center week stays 
well above either of the spike lows, emphasizing the inverted horn shape of 
the pattern. 

Looking back over the months, you can see that there are no downward 
spikes that come near the height of the horn spikes (as measured from the 
lowest low to the lower of the two adjacent weeks). The twin horns mark an 
unusual event, one that an investor should pay attention to. 

Clear visibility. For the left horn in the figure, the pattern appears after a 
downward price trend, allowing clear visibility to the left of the horn, because 
no downward trends or price outliers obscure the view. This visibility is 
important in that the horn should stand alone and not be part of a congestion 
region. It should mark the turning point of a downward price trend. However, 
because horns are rare, be flexible on visibility. The horn on the right of the 
chart doesn’t have the type of visibility you see on the left horn, but it’s still a 
valid pattern. 

The horn on the right side of the chart is what the pattern looks like in 
an uptrend. There is a small price retrace of 3 weeks’ duration just as the horn 


Table 43.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Use the weekly chart and locate two downward price spikes sepa- 


rated by a week. The two spikes should be taller than similar spikes 
over the prior year and be well below the low of the center week. 
The formation should look like an inverted horn. 


Clear visibility In a downtrend, the horn lows should be well below the surrounding 
lows, especially to the left of the formation for several weeks (ide- 
ally, but be flexible). Usually, horns appear near the end of declines 
but also happen on retraces in uptrends (where visibility is less clear 


to the left). 
Breakout direction, Breakout is upward. If price first closes below the bottom of the horn, 
confirmation then the pattern is not a horn. When price breaks out upward, it 


confirms the horn as a valid chart pattern. 


656 Horn Bottoms 


Tenet Healthcare Corp. (Medical Services, NYSE, THC) 


-20 
-19 
A Mm ly 217 
| Hy tht tl mL Nat ef 
{Hh | tl ' -15 
| ha | I 
wl roe Tally 
’ y i ne Bottom 7 : 
wu Horn Bottom Ai a / in Uptrend ee 
Fda -10 
itt Aw hal | a 
i ful i : 
afl Right “6 
-4 
- 3 
8 FMAM| | ASOND9S FMAM] | ASOND SS FMAM | 


Figure 43.2 Two examples of horns, one in a downward trend and one in an 
uptrend. Notice that the right pipe calls the bottom turn exactly. 


bottoms out. These few weeks separate the horn from the surrounding price 
action and allow easy recognition. 

The two spikes share the same low price, 14.50, and have good price 
overlap (as the right spike almost completely overlaps the left one). You can 
argue that the separation of the horn low from the surrounding weeks is not 
exceptional when compared with the pipe formations in early December and 
late June. That is certainly true, but most of the price bottoms over the prior 
year show remarkably even bottoms, not a jagged coastline (few tall spikes, in 
other words). 

Breakout direction, confirmation. Because we’re dealing with a bot- 
tom pattern, the breakout is always upward. The twin bottom pattern confirms 
as a valid horn bottom when price closes above the highest high in the 3-week 
pattern. Without confirmation, you have no horn. 


Focus on Failures 


Even though horn bottoms sport a low breakeven failure rate, they still fail. 
Consider Figure 43.3, which shows a 5% failure or a horn bottom. A 5% 
failure is when price starts out in the correct direction but falters (rising by no 
more than 5%), turns around, and heads back down. 

In this example, the two downward price spikes look good in that they are 
tall and with good overlap. They form as part of a retrace from the November 
high, and price usually returns to form a second high (a double top), or perhaps 


Focus on Failures 657 


Acuson Corp. (Medical Supplies, NYSE, ACN) 


7. 
Horn 
Bottom 


-14 
i h 


‘oa 


Wh jy 


m4 


fq My ft Wl 


-10 


93 D9F MAM | J AS ONDOBFMAMYJ J AS OND 


Figure 43.3 A horn bottom failure. Among other clues, similar-height price 
spikes (marked L) suggest this horn might be suspect. The descending triangle 
suggests a downward move. 


move even higher. If you believe that this stock will form a second top, then the 
horn is probably not worth betting on because the price appreciation potential 
is just not exciting (to me, anyway). 

Also, I have found that when a bullish pattern (like the horn) appears 
at the end of a long peak where price moves horizontally (as it does from 
November to the horn), forming a flat bottom or a block of horizontal price 
movement, many bullish chart patterns will fail. So the setup for the horn is 
bad right from the start. 

If you take a wider view of this chart, you might suspect that it will form a 
head-and-shoulders top. The left shoulder is already visible in late May 1994, 
and another shoulder could form as part of a mirror image, probably in April 
or May 1995 (it appeared much later, in September 1995). If that is the case, 
then you should also skip this trade because the right shoulder might top out 
at about 16. This theory assumes price continues moving lower and probably 
stops dropping in the 10-to-12 range (forming the neckline) before moving up 
to the right shoulder. Since price should drop, why buy now? 

Another clue to this horn failure is the spikes themselves. If you look over 
prior price action, you'll see several downward price spikes that rival the height 
of the horn. These are warning signs that this horn might not be anything 
special (and you’re looking for unique). 

The visibility is poor because earlier prices block the view. Usually, 
a downtrend has lower lows (like that shown in the February to April 1995 
decline). A horn appearing in a sharp decline should have good visibility to the 


658 Horn Bottoms 


left of the pattern. What this obscured view tells us is that price seems to form 
a base while the price tops are declining. In other words, a descending triangle 
is forming and the investor should be wary (the theory is that the descending 
triangle is bearish). 

Taken together, there seems to be ample evidence that this horn might 
not work out as expected. But, statistically, how often do horn bottoms fail? 
We'll see the answer in a bit as we review the numbers. 


Statistics 


Table 43.2 shows general statistics for horns. 

Number found. I found 1,485 horns on the weekly charts with the first 
one appearing in August 1991 and the most recent in December 2019, finding 
them in 762 stocks. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some stocks 
no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. All of the horns I studied 
were reversals of the downward price trend. In other words, they were bottoms, 
not tops. Some appeared in a rising price trend with just a week or two drop 
leading into the horn, but most appeared near the end of a downward trend. 

Average rise. The average rise in bull markets is almost twice what it is in 
bear markets. This makes intuitive sense. Think of trying to swim with (bullish 
horn, bullish market) or against a current (bullish horn, bearish market). If you 
don’t get run over by a boat, you can still reach shore, but you'll be more tired 
after fighting the current. So trade with the trend. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The S&P climbed 13% in bull markets 
and 4% in bear markets, as measured from the day of the horn breakout to 
the ultimate high. The rise in bear markets is somewhat unusual. Both markets 
helped the pattern perform better (the rising-tide-lifts-all-boats thing). Don’t 
you hate clichés? 

Days to ultimate high. It took 6 months for price to reach the ultimate 
high in bull markets, but 3 months in bear markets. Even though bear markets 


Table 43.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,079 406 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average rise 59% 34% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% 4% 
Days to ultimate high 183 89 


How many change trend? 65% 50% 


Statistics 659 


saw price climb 34% on average, the climb is steeper than in bull markets. 
How steep, you ask? It’s 20% faster. In other chart patterns (those on the daily 
scale), the velocity can be twice as fast in bear markets as in bull markets. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many horns see 
price rise more than 20% after the breakout. For patterns on the daily charts, 
I’m ecstatic to see values above 50%. Both the bull and bear markets meet that 
threshold, so horns do exceptionally well. 

Table 43.3 shows failure rates for horn bottoms. Notice that the failure 
rates start small but get bigger, fast. 

How do you read the table? Let me give you some examples. In bull mar- 
kets, about a third (35%) fail to see price rise more than 20%. Half do not rise 
more than 30%. 

If you want to make a 10% profit above a 5% commission and fees (15% 
total), 27% of the horns in bull markets and 41% in bear markets will fail to 
meet your profit objectives. 

Table 43.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is always upward. If you 
have a horn that does not break out upward, then it’s not a horn (or you haven’t 
waited long enough). 


Table 43.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 70 or 6% 36 or 9% 
10 124 or 18% 57 or 23% 
15 92 or 27% 74 or 41% 
20 95 or 35% 36 or 50% 
25 81 or 43% 23 or 56% 
30 67 or 49% 26 or 62% 
35 61 or 55% 26 or 68% 
50 129 or 67% 54 or 82% 
75 117 or 77% 38 or 91% 
Over 75 243 or 100% 36 or 100% 

Table 43.4 

Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 100% up 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the L 59%, M 52%, L 38%, M 33%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H 63% H 29% 


660 Horn Bottoms 


Yearly position, performance. The best performing horns in bull mar- 
kets have breakouts within a third of the yearly high (suggesting a momentum 
play: buy high, sell higher). You’ll want to stay out of the middle third. 

In bear markets, those near the yearly low do best (a bottom-fishing play: 
buy low, sell high) and those near the yearly high do worst. 

Table 43.5 shows pattern size statistics. Because we know the horn is a 
3-week pattern, there is no width to consider and no combination of height 
and width to ponder. That simplifies things. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones, as the table shows. 

Tall means the difference between the highest high and lowest low in 
the three-bar pattern (weekly scale), divided by the highest high (the break- 
out price). Horns taller than the median saw price climb more than did those 
shorter than the median. 

Table 43.6 shows volume-related statistics. Remember, we’re dealing 
with a 3-bar pattern. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression to find the slope of the volume 
trend from the left horn spike to the right one. Let’s discuss performance in 
bull markets. You can see the results for bear markets if you’re so inclined. 

Rising/Falling volume. Horns with falling volume performed substan- 
tially better than did those with rising volume. 

Breakout day volume. I computed the 1-month average volume and 
compared it to the breakout for each stock. Patterns with heavy breakout vol- 
ume performed substantially better than did those with light breakout volume. 

Table 43.7 shows how often price reached a stop location. I’m not sure if 
dividing the pattern in half makes sense for horns. They tend to be short any- 
way. If you feel the need to hold your nose while I discuss the statistics, that’s 
fine. I won’t take offense. 

If you place a stop-loss order at the top of the horn (the tallest of the three 
bars), price will hit the stop between 67% and 74% of the time. You might ask 
yourself why it’s so low. (I expected something like 90% or 95% when I started 
calculating this for other chart patterns. I thought ’'d made a mistake.) That’s 
because price shoots up and tags the ultimate high, then retraces. That retrace 
may snag the stop. However, my computer stops looking after price reaches 
the ultimate high. 

If you place a stop at the bottom of the horn, then the stock will seldom 
trigger as price searches for the ultimate high. Keep in mind that if you hold 
onto the trade beyond the ultimate high, then price might drop and tag your 
stop, taking you out of the trade. 

Table 43.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 2000s were the banner year for horn per- 
formance. The 2010s show the worst performance. If that underperformance 
continues, it’s bad news for us traders looking to make money. 

Failures over time. The failure rates over time have been stable, which 
I find reassuring. 


Table 43.5 
Size Statistics 


Statistics 


661 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 61% 38% 

Short pattern performance 57% 30% 

Median height as a percentage of breakout price 13.5% 17.8% 


Table 43.6 


Volume Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 57% down 69% down 
Rising volume trend performance 54% 33% 

Falling volume trend performance 62% 34% 

Heavy breakout volume performance 62% 36% 

Light breakout volume performance 53% 31% 


Table 43.7 


How Often Stops Hit 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 67% 74% 

Middle 24% 22% 

Pattern bottom 5% 4% 


Table 43.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 

Description Bull Market 
1990s 55% 
2000s 72% 
2010s 49% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 7% 
2000s 5% 
2010s 7% 


Table 43.9 shows busted pattern performance. 
Busted patterns count. With terrific performance from horns, we see 
that few patterns bust. 


662 Horn Bottoms 


Table 43.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 174 or 16% 82 or 20% 
Single bust count 107 or 61% 61 or 74% 
Double bust count 49 or 28% 12 or 15% 
Triple+ bust count 18 or 10% 9or11% 
Performance for all busted patterns -21% -29% 
Single busted performance -23% -27% 
Non-busted performance (Horn tops) -19% -26% 


Busted occurrence. I counted the types of busts (single, double, and 
more than two) and found most were single busts, as one might expect. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used horn tops as the proxy for 
a horn bottom with a downward breakout. The decline after a busted horn 
isn’t spectacular enough to consider, I think. However, in bull markets, single 
busted patterns perform best. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 43.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Compute the horn height by subtracting the 
lowest low from the highest high. Add the difference to the highest high to get 
the target price. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 
Because the horn can be a short pattern, it is comparatively easy for price to 
rise far enough to reach the target. Nothing is guaranteed, of course, and your 
situation will vary. 

Once you have a target in mind, take the distance from the target and 
divide it by the current price. Take the result and use Table 43.3 to check how 
many horns will fail to rise to the target. For example, say the horn’s target is 
$1 away in a $10 stock. That’s a rise of 10%. Table 43.3 says that 18% of horns 
will fail to see price rise more than 10%. That sounds like a reasonable target 
to me (82% of trades should see price reach the target in bull markets). 

Identify. Perhaps the most important key to horn bottoms is that they 
should continue to look like horns (see “Clear visibility” in Table 43.1). Price 
should climb after the twin horn spikes. You'll likely need to wait an extra week 
to prove this is true. 

Uptrends. Separate the price trend leading to the horn into either an 
uptrend or downtrend. Horns that appear late in uptrends may mark the end 


Trading Tactics 663 


Table 43.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Subtract the highest high from the lowest low in the horn (to get the 
pattern’s height) and add it to the highest high. The result is the 
target price. The bottom portion of the table shows the success rate of 
the measure rule using various heights. 


Identify Use the characteristics outlined in Table 43.1 to correctly identify a horn 
bottom. The week after the right bottom is key. Price should climb 
smartly, and the weekly low should not be anywhere near the horn 
low (in other words, the horn should still look like a horn and not be 
encroached on by the succeeding price action). 


Uptrends Some horns appear near the end of uptrends, so watch for the trend 
to change. 
Downtrends Horns will usually not mark the end of the downtrend, but they will be 


close. Price might continue to drift down for $1 or so (below the low- 
est spike low) and then head upward. 


Stop location See Table 43.7 for guidance. 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 91% 78% 
Percentage reaching full height target 74% 53% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 53% 32% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 40% 17% 


of the upward price move. Price continues moving higher (perhaps by 10% or 
so) and then stops. Of course, if your horn appears at the start of an uptrend, 
then the stock might well be on its way to a large gain. 

Downtrends. Horns in downtrends are common. On the one hand, if the 
downtrend is just a retrace of the prevailing uptrend, then refer to the uptrend 
guideline. In such a case, if the horn appears after an extensive advance, then 
the uptrend may be nearly over. Invest cautiously or look elsewhere. 

On the other hand, if the stock has been trending downward for a long 
time (for months anyway), then the end of the downtrend might be near. The 
horn probably will not mark the low exactly, but it should be close. Usually, 
horns appear a month or so before or after the actual turning point. 

If price is trending down and you see a horn forming, you might wait 
before buying the stock, just to be sure price has really turned around. For 
uptrends, consider buying into the situation immediately since price will only 
climb away from you. 

Stop location. Table 43.7 gives guidance on stop location, so read the 
discussion associated with it. 

Table 43.11 shows special performance features of horns. 


664 Horn Bottoms 


Table 43.11 
Special Features 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Spike height shorter than average, median performance 32% 29% 
Spike height taller than average, median performance 30% 16% 
Spike height twice the average, median performance 38% 22% 
Lower left spike, median performance 30% 21% 
Lower right spike, median performance 31% 17% 
Median horn difference as percentage of breakout price 1% 1% 
Difference > median, median performance 32% 23% 
Difference <= median, median performance 30% 18% 


Spike height performance. I measured the average height of price 
spikes over the prior year for each stock and compared it to each horn’s spike 
(so I don’t have an average spike height of all stocks to share). The horn spike 
size was the difference between the highest horn /ow and the lower of the 
three surrounding weekly lows (that is, the week before the pattern, the middle 
week, and the week after the horn). Then I collected the results, and the table 
reports the median percentage rise, not the average. I found that the average 
gave results too high because of one outlier sample. 

In bull markets, I didn’t see much performance difference, but spikes 
shorter than the average led to slightly better performance. In bear markets, 
I saw the same trend with short spikes outperforming, but the difference in 
performance is substantial. 

I also tested horn spikes at least twice as tall as the average. Here the 
median performance in bull markets did very well, but in bear markets they 
underperformed shorter height spikes. 

I consider the results unusual. In bull markets, the results say that short 
spikes are good for performance but exceptionally tall ones are even better. 
That sounds like a contradiction. 

Lower spike. I checked performance depending on which bottom of the 
horn was lower than the other. In bull markets, I didn’t see any performance 
worth remarking on, but the bear market results say that when the left spike is 
below the right, performance improves. The median rise, regardless of which 
spike is lower, is 20% in bear markets. So a lower left spike sees a slight perfor- 
mance improvement, but a lower right spike hurts performance. 

Price difference. I computed the difference between the two horn bot- 
toms as a percentage of the breakout price. When the difference was greater 
than the median 1%, the horn tended to perform better after the breakout. In 
other words, look for horns with uneven bottoms for the best performance. 
That’s especially helpful in bear markets. 


Experience 665 


I’ve seen this result in other double bottoms, where they outperform if 
the bottoms are uneven. It suggests the finding is reliable. 


Experience 


I haven’t traded horn bottoms much, probably because I spend my life on the 
daily scales, not the weekly. Figure 43.4 shows a trade I made in Michaels 
Stores (MIK) during the 2000 to 2002 bear market, on the weekly scale. 

The horn bottom is at A, encompassing three price bars. Here are my notes 
for the buy: “30 March 2001.1 bought using a limit order at 30 [not split adjusted]. 
Horn bottom is signaling an upswing. March is seasonally strong for the stock in 
last 5 years. I hope the market will turn around and send retailers higher. Also, 
horizontal trend of last 2 months [F] matches November—December 2000 trend 
[G]. MMU [measured move up] from October 2000 to February 2001 [H to I] 
means recent retrace is not an MMD [measured move down], but a retrace to 
MMU corrective phase [G]. I hope and expect stock to climb to 40 shortly.” 

After price returns to the corrective phase (G) of a measured move up, 
there’s a good chance price will resume the rise. Price retraced into the correc- 
tive phase at C before rebounding. 

I bought at B and that was before confirmation of the horn. I got lucky 
and held on as price dropped to C before beginning its up move. It could as 
easily continued lower, especially because this was a bear market. 


¢ Lesson: Wait for confirmation. 


Price made a nice straight-line move higher, confirming the horn at D, 
and then turned sideways going into E. Here’s what I wrote for the sale: “22 


Michaels Stores (MIK) 


: le t 23 
ug! “ty a { 21 
bt tl A | 4 19 
rie | ee 
Lite ee , 16 
rf LF ; | 4,15 
al 14 
“ 13 
1, 12 
‘s myr ; i "1 
1, Ey ' ats 
Hy 1! cet Fir 10 
A \ E pT ! 9 
1" ill. ae ay 
I it B te 8 
tl : hy 7 
1 
1 a 
if | A I 
1 6 
— 
5 
H 
0 } AS ONODOlLFMA MJ J} AS OND EMA MY} AS OND 4 


Figure 43.4 This horn bottom trade made 33% in a bear market. 


666 Horn Bottoms 


June 2001. I sold this morning. Stock shows signs of topping out. Weak volume 
on the top, matching prior top during January. Although the FED [Federal 
Reserve] is expected to cut interest rates next week, I think the cut will send the 
market lower. It might be for .25% instead of .5%, but market seems buoyant 
for some reason. I don’t trust the feeling, believing the averages will go down 
more. The NASDAQ I think will retest the low. It has farther to fall.” 

I sold the stock at E for a 33% gain, so for a swing trade, I sold when the 
trend ended. In early July the stock was down 10% below my sale price, and in 
September the stock bottomed at 15% down. 

In another trade, I bought a stock showing a horn in a downward price 
trend. Price climbed 8% after I bought and then continued lower after the 
release of bad earnings. I sold my shares for a loss soon after. That was the 
smart move because the stock continued lower, ending 74% below the lower 
of the horn spikes. Thank goodness I got out of that trade quickly. 


¢ Lesson: Don’t buy within 3 weeks of an earnings announcement 
(I didn’t). 

¢ Lesson: Do your homework to be sure you’re taking a position in a 
quality stock, one that’s waiting for a reason to move higher. 


Sample Trade 


Mary saw the horn bottom forming in the stock pictured in Figure 43.5. Price 
began climbing in early October 1992 at a low of 8.63. From that point, it 
soared to the current price in several waves. Waves pushing price higher took 
between 4 and 5 months, whereas those moving lower took 3 months. 

When the horn formed, the 5-month up cycle was in progress; “That’s 
what I hoped, anyway. The chart told me price would continue moving up. It 
certainly climbed above the right horn low [at 31], leaving the horn visible.” 

She bought the stock the week after the horn completed at 35. She 
hoped the horn marked an end to the short retrace and price would resume its 
upward trend. 

When price curled around, she placed a stop at 30.88—12 cents below 
the lowest horn low. “I didn’t think it would be low enough, but a 12% loss was 
all I was willing to tolerate.” 

In early December, the trade confirmed her worst fears. “I was stopped 
out when the stock plummeted from 33 to 29.” Three weeks later the stock hit 
bottom at 28.50 and turned around. From high to low, the decline lasted just 
over 3 months and measured 19%. 

Price moved swiftly upward and topped out at 57, exactly double the 
28.50 low. 


Sample Trade 667 


Watkins Johnson Co. (Semiconductor Cap Equip., NYSE, WJ) 


5 Months 3 Months 5 Months 3 Months Stock Bought it { er 
Up Down Up Down Here 4 


t 
ad -39 


ih a 
a in y zl 
Retest of Horn -27 


Py om % 


Tet Pty 


AWUANORPWUNO 


92ND93 FMAMJJ] ASONDI4 FMAMJ J ASONDISFMAMYJ J AS 


Figure 43.5 Horn bottom on weekly chart. As described in the Sample Trade, 
Mary was stopped out during the throwback just before price doubled. 


“Did I sell too soon?” she asked me. Before I could answer, she said, “No. 
The last thing I want to do is start a bad habit where I bend the rules and win, 
and then get hammered with a huge loss. I sold when the trade went bad. Sure, 
I missed out on doubling my money, but there will always be another trade. 

“What Id like to know is how to improve what I did. Why did the stock 
drop four points? [Il find out and see if I can detect it coming the next time. 
Maybe I'll narrow the loss, too, by placing the stop closer.” 


44 


Horn Tops 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Two upward price spikes separated by a week on the weekly chart and 
looking like a horn. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term 
bearish reversal bearish reversal 
Performance rank 1 (best) out of 2 1 (best) out of 2 
Breakeven failure rate 9% 3% 
Average decline 19% 26% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Percentage meeting 54% 56% 
price target 
See also Double tops (all varieties of Adam and 


Eve), pipe tops 


Horn tops are rare, especially in bear markets (maybe because bear markets 
tend to be short). I find that discovery surprising for a bearish chart pattern, 
but that is what the numbers tell me. The pattern has a low failure rate with a 
decent decline. 


668 


Tour 669 


Good news! The rank shows horn tops place first for performance. Bad 
news: The rank is based on just two types of chart patterns on the weekly scale 
(the other is a pipe top). 

The full height measure rule works about half the time, which I find dis- 
concerting. Horns aren’t tall patterns, so price should have an easy time drop- 
ping a pattern’s height downward. 


Tour 


With many chart patterns, there is usually an inverted cousin: Double bottoms 
have double tops, for example. So it is with horn tops, the inverted variety of 
a horn bottom. Having discovered the bottoms, I wondered if the tops would 
work as well. Before we delve into the numbers, what do horn tops look like? 

Figure 44.1 shows an example of a timely horn top. It sports twin peaks 
separated by a week and is commonly found near the end of an uptrend like 
that shown. Volume is usually heavy on both peaks but not by a huge margin 
above the average. After the right price spike, price drops lower and continues 
moving down, sometimes substantially. 

In the figure, the stock begins its rise to the horn in mid-June 1993 at 
a price of 20.38. At the peak, price reaches a high of 32.63, a gain of 60% in 
2 months. With such a sharp gain in so little time, a consolidation or conges- 
tion region is likely and expected. Instead, the horn top marks a change in 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD) 


— 34 
| Double Top — _ 32 


[tyl, i Fi es 

nf | 

| ul! | Halt} jb 20 
“4 yf a 


-14 


T 
4y ft -12 
|! if ae 


92 J} A S O N D 93 FMA MJ J AS O N D 94 F M 


Figure 44.1 Horn top showing twin peaks. The stock drops almost in half after 
the horn top. Note the weekly time scale. The two peaks in April and August 
represent a double top. 


670 Horn Tops 


trend. Combined with the earlier top, the double top (or even a triple top) 
pattern is a bearish signal. 

After the twin peaks of the horn appear, price drops to 26, and then pulls 
back to the formation base, generally following an up-sloping trendline. Price 
heads down again. In the beginning of January 1994, price reaches bottom at 
16.75 for a decline of almost 50%. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 44.1 shows identification characteristics that make horn tops easy to 
recognize. Consider the horn shown in Figure 44.2. 

Appearance. Use the weekly chart to facilitate identification. Yes, horn 
tops appear on the daily scales (and other scales, too), but performance is best 
on the weekly charts. 

Look for twin price spikes that are separated by a week. The two spikes 
should tower above the surrounding landscape and be unusual in height (taller 
than other spikes encountered during the year). In the figure, you can see that 
the price spike in late September is the only real competition (for the period 
shown, anyway). 

The tops of the horn’s spikes need not peak at the same price, but the 
pattern looks way cool when they do. 

Clear visibility. The two spikes should be well above the three adjacent 
price bars (before, middle, and after the horn). In an uptrend, if you look to the 
left, you should have clear visibility. Horn tops in downtrends (often as upward 
retraces in a downtrend) might find clear visibility to the left of the pattern 
harder to find. Be flexible for both trend directions. The point is this: You’re 
looking for the horn peaks to stand out in a crowd of price movement. 


Table 44.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Use the weekly chart and locate two upward price spikes separated by 
a week. The two spikes should be taller than similar spikes over the 
prior year and tower above the high of the center week. It should look 
like a horn. 


Clear visibility | The horn highs should be well above the surrounding highs, and the 
best performing reversals appear at the end of a long uptrend. 
Breakout Downward. 
direction 


Confirmation The pattern becomes a valid horn top when price closes below the 
lowest low in the 3-week pattern. 


Focus on Failures 671 


Homestake Mining (Gold/Silver Mining, NYSE, HM) 


— 26 

Horn 95 

24 

| : 

Prior Price | hi, | -22 
Spike 


My 
} | ul 
| r im 


93 +O N D 94 F M A ™M J J A Ss Oo N OD 95 F 


2 in Ml | il, ; Hy “* 


-13 


Figure 44.2 Horn tops with unusually tall price spikes. This horn exceeds the 
clearance of an earlier spike. 


Breakout direction. The breakout is always downward from a horn top. 
A pattern having an upward breakout (a close above the top of the pattern 
instead of below the bottom of it) is not a horn top. 

Confirmation. Confirmation occurs when price closes below the lowest 
low in the 3-week pattern. Only when that happens does the pattern become 
a valid horn top. Do not trade a horn top without confirmation because price 
might continue rising. 


Focus on Failures 


There are a variety of reasons why a particular chart pattern fails (and most of 
them go unknown). Some break out upward and never look back (and aren’t 
horn tops by definition), whereas others see price begin moving down, falter, 
and then climb significantly. The latter case, the so-called 5% failures, happen 
most often with horn tops, but are still rare. Price fails to continue down by 
more than 5% before recovering and heading higher. 

Most horns warn about a coming decline by forming less than 2 months 
before a major turn. That finding is worth knowing. If a horn fails to call the 
turn in a stock you own, be alert to a possible trend change coming soon. 

You can improve your investment performance if you consider the over- 
all environment for the stock. Look at the horn top pictured in Figure 44.3. 
After trending down for a year, the stock pierced the down-sloping trendline, 
signaling a trend change, and price moved higher. Then the horn top formed. 


672 — Horn Tops 


Bandag Inc. (Tire & Rubber, NYSE, BDG) 


Horn Top | -62 


h 


lng <a 


in 


Pipe Bottom 


92 A S O N D 95 F MA M J J A’ S OF N D 94 FM 


Figure 44.3 Horn top appearing after an extended downtrend. It is probably 
best to ignore such horn tops. A pipe bottom marks the turning point. 


In situations like this, after a long downtrend, a stock usually bounces up, 
curls around, and retests the low, forming a double bottom (but not always, of 
course). So when the horn formed, it probably signaled the price top before 
the retest. That was a good omen, an opportunity to short the stock as price 
returned to the June low. 

However, the stock stalled. It did confirm the horn top as a valid chart 
pattern, but the stock continued to move sideways. Obviously there was fun- 
damental news to support the stock and keep it from dropping. What was 
that news? I have no idea, but the bulls and bears struggled for control of 
the situation. Eventually the bulls won, and their buying demand forced the 
stock upward. 

If you had shorted the stock, a close above the top of the horn would have 
been the exit signal. 

Sometimes I search the Internet to discover news that would account for 
a stock’s behavior and come up empty. Someone wanted to buy the stock or 
someone wanted to sell it. Of course, for each trade, both of those are true: For 
every share sold one is bought. Price moves not because buyers overwhelm sell- 
ers but because buying demand overwhelms selling pressure (or the reverse). 

Failures happen. It’s something that chart pattern traders have to deal with. 


Statistics 


Table 44.2 shows general statistics for horns. 


Statistics 673 


Table 44.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 843 325 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average decline -19% -26% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -2% -9% 
Days to ultimate low 54 39 
How many change trend? 36% 54% 


Number found. I found the first horn in July 1991 and the most recent 
in September 2019, using 678 stocks to uncover 1,168 horns. Not all stocks 
covered the entire period and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. As a top, horns act as a 
reversal of the prevailing upward price trend by definition. 

Average decline. The average decline is far higher than what we see 
on the daily charts, but that’s expected. Weekly patterns, in the search for the 
ultimate low, ignore price closing above the top of the pattern during the week. 
Only the close at week’s end is important, so the search for the ultimate low 
may continue further than it does on the daily scale. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Both the bull and bear markets showed 
losses from the day of the horn breakout to the day of the ultimate low. That 
is unusual for bull markets, but it happens. It shows that the general market 
helped the stock move lower (the inverse of a rising tide lifts all boats). 

Days to ultimate low. After the breakout, it takes between 2 and 
3 months, on average, to reach the ultimate low, depending on market condi- 
tions. Since that is an average, your results will vary, but it suggests you need 
patience to reach the full potential of this chart pattern .. . unless you’re in a 
bear market. 

Notice (you'll have to do the math to prove this) that the decline is almost 
twice as fast in bear markets as in bull ones. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how often price drops more 
than 20% after the breakout. The two numbers slightly beat the averages of 
those on the daily charts. 

Table 44.3 shows failure rates for horn tops with the bear market failure 
rates being smaller than the bull market ones. That finding should not come as 
a surprise because horn tops are bearish chart patterns. 

How do you read the table? Let me give you a few examples. In bull mar- 
kets, 30% of the patterns fail to see price drop more than 10%. Just about half 
(49%) fail to see price drop more than 15%. 

Notice how the failure rate triples as the maximum decline moves from 
5% to 10%. At 15%, the bear market failure rate has climbed to eight times 


674 Horn Tops 


Table 44.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 74 or 9% 10 or 3% 
10 183 or 30% 32 or 13% 
15 155 or 49% 37 or 24% 
20 125 or 64% 69 or 46% 
25 80 or 73% 29 or 54% 
30 72 or 82% 39 or 66% 
35 47 or 87% 26 or 74% 
50 85 or 97% 52 or 90% 
75 22 or 100% 28 or 99% 
Over 75 0 or 100% 3 or 100% 

Table 44.4 

Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-—20%, M -19%, L-27%, M -26%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H-17% H -23% 


the breakeven rate. Wow. If you think you’re going to make a killing trading 
chart patterns, think again. 

Table 44.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition a horn top breaks out downward. 
A downward breakout happens when price closes below the lowest price bar 
in the 3-bar pattern. 

Yearly position, performance. The best performing horn tops are those 
with breakouts near the yearly low. You'll want to avoid trading horn tops 
within a third of the yearly high because they perform worst. That makes 
sense: You should short a stock making new lows, not new highs (just think if 
the trend continues and you'll understand that). 

Table 44.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Since horns have a defined 3-week width, only height is impor- 
tant. I compared horns to the median height as a percentage of the breakout 
price and found that patterns taller than the median performed better after the 
breakout than did short ones. The performance difference is high enough that 
you might want to pay attention to this one. Give yourself an edge and trade 
only tall patterns for the best performance. And that’s worth remembering for 
all chart patterns (taller is better). 


Statistics 675 


Table 44.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -21% -28% 
Short pattern performance -17% -24% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 13.95% 19.65% 

Table 44.6 

Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 60% down 58% down 
Rising volume trend performance -19% -28% 
Falling volume trend performance -19% -25% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -20% -27% 
Light breakout volume performance -18% -26% 


Table 44.7 
How Often Stops Hit 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 4% 1% 

Middle 22% 15% 

Pattern bottom 69% 62% 


Table 44.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward across the 3-bar pattern, but 
it’s close to random. Does volume make a big difference for performance? Let’s 
take a look. 

Rising/Falling volume. In bear markets, horns with a rising volume 
trend outperformed those with a falling trend (a 12% improvement!). In bull 
markets, there was no performance difference. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume assisted performance in 
both bull and bear markets. 

Table 44.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location on the journey 
to finding the ultimate low. For example, if you place a stop at the top of the 
horn (the taller of the two spikes), price will trigger the stop almost never. 
Keep in mind that after price reaches the ultimate low, it could rebound and 
trigger the stop. I only checked the decline until price found the ultimate low. 

If you place the stop at the bottom of the pattern, you'll be stopped out 
about twice every three trades. 


676 Horn Tops 


Table 44.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -19% 
2000s -17% 
2010s -19% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 8% 
2000s 11% 
2010s 8% 

Table 44.9 

Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 233 or 28% 39 or 12% 
Single bust count 155 or 67% 22 or 56% 
Double bust count 11 or 5% 4 or 10% 
Triple+ bust count 67 or 29% 13 or 33% 
Performance for all busted patterns 45% 24% 
Single busted performance 67% 56% 
Non-busted performance (horn bottoms) 59% 34% 


Table 44.8 shows the performance over three decades. I like to see how 
the pattern has behaved over time (or misbehaved). Because bear markets only 
happened in the 2000s, they are not included in the statistics. 

Performance over time. Performance has been constant across the three 
decades with the 2000s suffering more than the other two decades. 

Failures over time. The failure rate is highest in the 2000s, which makes 
sense because it was the worst performing of the three decades. 

Table 44.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Comparatively few patterns bust, especially in 
bear markets. 

Busted occurrence. When horn tops bust, most of them will be single 
busted patterns. Oddly, triple (or more) busts come in second place. I’ve seen 
that trend in other chart pattern types, too. I try to justify it by knowing that 
triple+ means three or more busts, but do a lot of patterns bust four, five, or 
more times? 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared the performance of 
busted patterns with horn bottoms, which I used as a proxy for horn tops with 
upward breakouts. 


Trading Tactics 677 


Single busted horns outperform the other two types I studied (“all busted” 
horn tops, meaning single, double, and three or more busts, and “non-busted” 
horn bottoms). 

The trick to getting such a large gain is to trade only single busted pat- 
terns. I haven’t found a good way to determine that they will single bust, only 
that they do 67% of the time in bull markets. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 44.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Compute the horn height by subtracting the 
lowest low from the highest high in the pattern. Subtract the height from the 
lowest low to get the target price. 

How often does the measure rule work? The full height works about 
half the time as the lower portion of the table shows. You may wish to cut the 
height in half (or use another value) for a closer or farther target. 


Table 44.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Subtract the lowest low from the highest high in the horn to get the 
pattern’s height. To find the target, subtract the height from the low- 
est low. The lower portion of this table shows how often the measure 


rule works. 
Threat Look for an uptrend spanning many months. Such uptrends often show 
assessment horns near the end of the trend. If the horn top appears near the end 


of a long downtrend, then it is best to avoid it. Watch out for horns 
appearing after a downward trend when the trend changes and price 
starts moving higher (an upward retrace in a downtrend). Price may 
decline, but the decline is usually short-lived (as in the rise between a 
double bottom). 


Trend change  Ahorn top usually signals an approaching trend change, often in less 
than 2 months. 


Stop location Use Table 44.7 for help with stop placement. 
Busted trade Single busted horn tops show good performance. See Table 44.9. 


Tips See text. 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 81% 83% 
Percentage reaching full height target 54% 56% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 23% 23% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 11% 12% 


678 Horn Tops 


For example, say a horn has a high price of 10 and a low of 9, for a height 
of $1. Subtract the height from the low to get a target of 8. A $1 decline 
in a stock with a breakout price of 9 means an 11% decline. (Let’s pretend 
the decline is an even 10%.) Table 44.3 says that over 30% of horn tops in 
bull markets will fail to see price drop more than 10%. That means if you 
trade it perfectly, there’s a 70% chance price will decline at least 10%. That’s 
good to know. 

Threat assessment. After you have correctly identified the horn, look 
at the surrounding price pattern. Is the stock trending higher and has it been 
moving higher for months now? If so, then the horn may signal an approach- 
ing top. Sometimes the horn calls the turn exactly while at other times it is off 
by a few months (usually it precedes the turn, but sometimes it lags). 

If the horn appears in a downtrend, that is fine. The horn is simply 
implying that the trend will continue down. However, should the horn appear 
after an extended downtrend, then the possibility of further declines may be 
in jeopardy. 

This behavior is especially true if the horn appears after a long down- 
trend when price is beginning to move up again (when it retraces some of its 
losses). Often the retrace signals a trend change. You will be buying into a situ- 
ation in which you believe price will fall and retest the low, but price will dip 
slightly and then head higher. 

Be cautious when selling short after a long downtrend, and be especially 
cautious if the downtrend has ended and the horn seems to mark the end of 
an upward retrace. Do not expect price to fall far. It does occasionally, but the 
majority of the decline has already passed. 

Trend change. Even if a horn top fails to see price drop by more than 
5%, there is a chance that the horn is a premature signal of a bearish trend 
change. Therefore, whenever you see a horn top, be aware that the end of an 
uptrend may be just a few months away. 

Stop location. The discussion associated with Table 44.7 describes where 
to place a stop. Be sure to convert the potential loss into a percentage of the 
breakout price. Can you tolerate such a loss? 

For example, if you place a stop $2 above the current price of $10, that’s a 
potential 20% (100 x 2/10) loss. Many traders like to limit losses to 8% or less, 
so you may want to rethink the stop location. 

Busted trade. A single busted pattern might be a good way to make 
some big bucks. Although you won’t be able to tell that a horn top will single 
bust before you trade it, you'll be right 67% of the time in bull markets on 
average. 

Place a buy stop a penny above the top of the horn and ride price higher. 
In bull markets, the average gain of a single busted pattern is 67% (from 
Table 44.9). 

Tips. I only have a few tips to share with you. I’ve written that you should 
avoid shorting stocks making new highs and go for those making new lows. 


Trading Tactics 679 


However, horn tops seem to fail a lot down there (near the yearly low or even 
a multiyear low). 

I checked the statistics, and they say ’m crazy. Horns within a third of the 
yearly low fail 6% of the time. Those near the yearly high fail twice as often: 
12% of the time. The middle third comes in at 9% failing. 

Maybe we’re both right. Price drops more than 5% but then recovers, 
leaving not much profit behind if you trade it perfectly. And if you’re a mere 
mortal, then forget about making money. Do your own research to check if my 
notion is right or wrong. 


¢ Short stocks making new lows, not new highs, but horns may not work 
as well down there. 


I have noticed that for swing trades, you only make a little profit when 
yow’re right and shooting for a nearby support area. If the trade goes against 
you, with a stop at the top of the horn, it’s painful, meaning the loss is so much 
larger than the potential profit. So do check the size of the potential profit 
versus the size of the potential loss. If the ratio is yucky, then don’t trade it or 
adjust the stop location. 


¢ Check the potential profit versus loss before trading to see if it’s worth 
the risk of a trade. 


When horn trades work, they tend to do so quickly. Down price goes. 
When they fail, they can do so immediately. However, if I see price starting to 
move sideways (often for weeks to months), that tells me the trade is going to 
be a loser. Exit immediately. 


¢ If price moves sideways (often for weeks or months), the trade is more 
likely to fail. 


Table 44.11 shows special features of horn tops. 

Spike height performance. I determined the height of the spike from 
the lower of the two horn spikes to the higher of the adjacent three weeks 
(week before the left horn spike, middle week, and week after the right horn 
spike). I compared that height to the average spike height for the stock over 
the prior year. For those horn spikes shorter than their average, the median 
performance in bull markets was a drop of 16%. Spikes taller than their aver- 
age showed losses of 15%. For those patterns with horn spikes at least twice 
the average height, they performed even worse, as the table shows. 

The taller the spike the worse the performance. 

Price difference. I looked at the price difference between the two highs 
in the horn top and compared it to the median for all horn tops. When there 
was a large price variation (above the median 1%), the horn performed better 
after the breakout. So look for horns with uneven tops. 


680 ~—_ Horn Tops 


Table 44.11 

Special Features 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Spike height shorter than average, median performance -16% -23% 
Spike height taller than average, median performance -15% -22% 
Spike height twice the average, median performance -14% -18% 
Median horn difference as percentage of breakout price 1% 1% 
Difference > median, median performance -20% -28% 
Difference <= median, median performance -17% -25% 
Sample Trade 


Consider the situation Doug faced in Figure 44.4. When the stock broke out 
of a congestion region in late 2016 (E, looking like a symmetrical triangle), he 
bought the stock and received a fill of 20.22 in early November. 

In December 2019, the stock made another peak, but it was below the 
prior ones made since late 2017 (the three highest peaks on the chart). The 
stock looked tired. From September 2017 until 2020, the stock had moved 
sideways to down during that time. That sideways move is common for stocks 
that need a rest after having made big moves upward. 

In this case, the stock almost tripled off the January 2016 low of 12.62. 
“T thought the stock had entered a coma.” 


Columbus Mckinnon (CMCO) 
A 


til f iy! 


i ny lth tlh 41 

po || ny if iy 

i" | VV 4 cos 

I | 29 

ai | | p27 
yi } : 
21 

Bought a 
519 


| Ts 
| | | pe 2 
wt” Mi 3 


16 M | Ss | S 18 M | Ss 19 M | S 20 M | 


Figure 44.4 Two horn tops and Covid-19 convinced Doug to sell his holding 
during the bear market drop of 2020. 


Sample Trade 681 


In the early months of 2020, he heard about the Covid-19 virus spreading 
across the world and he studied the implications. “I didn’t like what I learned.” 

When the horn top appeared at B, he wasn’t too concerned. Covid-19 was 
getting worse, but the stock market was holding up just fine and so was his stock. 

He looked back at the historical price chart (weekly scale) and found 
another horn top at A. This one formed a double top. Visibility to the left of 
the pattern was clear compared to the one at B where the stock was already 
trending lower. The A pattern correctly predicted a drop that turned into a 
decline of 13 points, or 32% below the bottom of the horn (approximately). 

“The horn top at B looked to be saying the same thing, that the drop 
would continue.” Indeed, the stock started dropping the week of the breakout 
and plunged from about 38 to 31 in a week. 

That big drop combined with dying from Covid-19 and the possibility of 
being unemployed for months convinced him to sell his position and use some 
of the profit to buy toilet paper (people in the United States hoarded the stuff). 

When the stock opened at C, he sold his stock. He received a fill at 31 
and change (for a profit of 54%) and watched the stock drop to a low of 19.20 
in mid-March (D), a 38% plunge below his sale price. Price started to recover, 
and what did his eyes reveal? 

A horn bottom. 

“T struggled with wanting to buy the stock, but thought a second bottom 
would happen when the markets realized that the virus might be worse in the 
fall and that unemployment claims would skyrocket again.” 

He overcame his fear and knew a good buying opportunity when he saw 
one. He decided to buy the stock. He received a fill at 26.40, two weeks after 
the right horn bottom. The stock is currently at about 36, and the general 
market is racing higher. 


45 


Island Reversals 


\| I 
oI! | Tu 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price has two gaps at the same price level with price movement between 
the two gaps, creating and separating the island from the mainland. 


Island Tops (Downward Breakouts) 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term 
bearish reversal bearish reversal 

Performance rank 31 out of 36 12 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 34% 14% 

Average drop 13% 22% 

Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 55% 58% 

Percentage meeting 62% 61% 


price target 


682 


Tour 683 
Island Bottoms (Upward Breakouts) 
Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Long-term Short-term 

bullish reversal bullish reversal 
Performance rank 38 out of 39 20 (last) out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 31% 30% 
Average rise 31% 20% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Throwbacks 54% 52% 
Percentage meeting 82% 75% 


price target 


The performance of island reversals is dreadful. Island bottoms in bear mar- 
kets place last, and bull markets aren’t much better (next to last). Island tops are 
close to the bottom of the performance list as well. 

Failure rates for island bottoms rank last (worst). Island tops are also near 
the bottom of the list. 

With performance such as this, trading every island that you see is a way 
to drown in losses. You can improve performance by selecting patterns with 
the proper height and width characteristics for the market you are trading, as 
described later in this chapter, but you might want to skip trading this pattern 
altogether. 

Let’s take an island tour to see some examples. 


Tour 


Figure 45.1 shows what island reversals look like. The first island, shown on 
the far left, is a one-day reversal. In the study of islands, I did not tabulate such 
narrow patterns, but the figure shows an example of a small reversal. 

The pattern to the right of the one-day reversal is an island bottom. Price 
gaps down in mid-September, reaches a new low in early October, and then 
gaps up later in the month. The two gaps appear at about the same price level, 
11.50. From that point, price climbs quite rapidly and reaches a high of 21.50, 
well above the 11.25 price posted the day before the breakout. Notice that the 
breakout is on very high volume. 

The last island highlighted on the chart is near the top. It is an island 
top, and price moves down from about 20 to less than 8. This pattern is a tra- 
ditional island top because of its compact size. I did not count it in my tabula- 
tions because the gap on the right is less than the 25 cents I used to filter out 
such patterns. Still it does emphasize a trend reversal with excellent timing. 


684 Island Reversals 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD) 


we ee My “” 


| ” Fa h “3 


Island Bottom Hi 


B 
Pn, * -11 


j \ 
hinge gt 


| 
i | [ay 
+ Island Bottom 
or One-Day 


= Reversal 


Aug 91 Se Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr Ma Jun Jul 
9g p Pp ly 


Figure 45.1 A one-day reversal, island bottom, and island top. You can see the 
price change that results after each reversal. 


Not highlighted is a very large island top. The island starts at point A 
while a matching right gap is the large price decline in mid-June (point B). The 
island is almost 8 months long. 


Identification Guidelines 


Island reversals are easy to identify, and Table 45.1 shows the identification 
characteristics. 

Appearance. Both types of reversals, tops and bottoms, are set off by 
gaps. The gaps appear at or near the same price level but are typically not the 
same size. The large breakaway gap marked as point B in Figure 45.1 (on the 
far right) makes this clear. That gap is almost $5 tall while the one on the left 
(point A) is only 38 cents tall. 

As far as identification goes, the gap in mid-December 1991 (point C) 
should not be paired with the gap in late October (point A) since they do 
not share a common price. Even though the price pattern looks like an island 
because it is set off by gaps, it is not an island reversal by the traditional defi- 
nition. The gaps must overlap price or be quite close to one another. In this 
study, all islands have price gaps within 13 cents of one another and are at least 
25 cents or larger. In addition, I did not consider one-day reversals (islands 
composed of 1 day) as part of this study. I believe that such islands are too dif- 
ficult on which to base an effective trading policy. 

Price trends. Consider Figure 45.2, which shows several island rever- 
sals. The first two islands on the left happen as part of a quick retrace in a 


Identification Guidelines 685 


Table 45.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Gaps set off both island tops and bottoms and share all or part of 
the same price level. Most times, price moves away from the gaps, 
leaving the island with a clear view of the opposing gap. 


Rising trend Island tops have price that leads up to the left gap and falls away from 
the right gap. 

Falling trend Island bottoms have price that leads down to the left gap and rises away 
from the right gap. 

Volume Volume is usually high on the breakout day (the day price makes a sec- 
ond gap and forms the island) but need not be. 

Breakout Tops break out downward; bottoms break out upward. 

direction 
Duration The island can be from 1 day (a 1-day reversal) to several months long. 


Some analysts have suggested that islands are quite short, up to a 
week or two, with relatively flat price movement, but | placed no such 
restrictions on them. 


Ann Taylor (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, ANN) 


-35 
é 4 

Pe ee 2 
} Ii -31 
i "ey -29 
Ha, 

j | -27 
; ~25 


hi Island Top 


PA [ae bal +“ 


Ina a Island Bottom ll, ‘i =a 


4, -19 
Lu ———e 

itl, a | (Pet IslandTop fh “ut 17 

hy " Shoulder iy! 
shouineshoulder Shoulder -15 

j wl 

j lh I, u lal it aia 
Pel aad -1 


Aug 91 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 45.2 Several island reversals, some with short durations and some with 
longer durations. The island bottom is also a complex head-and-shoulders bottom 
that retests the neckline in April. 


longer downtrend. The small island tops last for about a week before price 
resumes its downward move. 

The wide island bottom forms after an extensive decline that sees price drop 
from a high of 36.50 to 12.00 in less than 5 months. The exhaustion gap occurs 


686 Island Reversals 


on very high volume (the highest on the chart), and price that day has a very tall 
trading range. The gap remains open until price gaps upward in late January. 

The island bottom looks like a complex head-and-shoulders bottom. 
Marked on the figure are dual shoulders and two heads. Volume for the head- 
and-shoulders pattern is what you would expect: highest on the left shoulder, 
diminished on the head, and quite low on the right shoulder. Only after price 
gaps upward does volume spike higher for 2 days before recovering and trend- 
ing downward. 

The island top on the right of the figure is somewhat difficult to spot 
because of the large gap on the left that matches the small one on the right. 
It only takes a few days for price to reach its high before easing down. When 
price gaps lower at the end of March, volume does not budge. 

Volume. Volume usually trends downward over the length of the pat- 
tern from gap to gap. Breakout day volume on the second (right) gap tends 
to be heavy, but be flexible. Don’t discard a pattern because it has an unusual 
volume trend. 

Breakout direction. By definition, island tops break out downward and 
island bottoms break out upward. The breakout occurs at the second, right, gap. 

Duration. The average length for an island is 2 to 3 weeks long, but it 
can vary from a single day to a year. Islands too long may be difficult to spot. If 
traders do not recognize a pattern, then they will not trade it. Stick with obvi- 
ous islands, usually of short duration (say, up to 3 months). 


Focus on Failures 


Failures come in all manners of depiction. Look at Figure 45.3, a chart of a 
large island top. The island is unusual because it forms after a region of con- 
solidation (shown as the sideways move from October to December). The first 
gap is a breakaway gap since it breaks away from the consolidation region on 
high volume and price moves up. The second gap is an exhaustion gap that 
closes quickly and ends the downtrend. 

The figure shows a 5% failure. Price heads lower after the second gap on 
the right, but declines by no more than 5% before recovering and moving sub- 
stantially higher. Why? There is a common law, for lack of a better term, that says 
price has to have something to reverse. In Figure 45.3, you can see that price 
consolidated for 2 months (end of 1993). When the island top appeared, what was 
there to reverse? The rise from December to mid-February, when price climbed 
from roughly 55 to 65, unwound on the decline going into the right gap, leaving 
the stock where it started the island. Beyond that, the prior year’s worth of sup- 
port at that level (not shown) was too extensive to allow any further decline. 

There has to be something to reverse. Remember that before you take a posi- 
tion in a stock, especially something such as an island reversal that is known to 
be light on performance. 


Focus on Failures 687 


Emerson Electric Co (Electrical Equipment, NYSE, EMR) ae 
A l -64 
pst AN “s 


h end To 
| ¥] Island Top I i! 


Tall Maly Wo s6 


Oct 93 Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 45.3 Long island top that fails because price drops by less than 5%. 
A reversal needs something to reverse. 


McDermott International (Oilfield SVCS/Equipment, NYSE, MDR) 


Throwback 


hh In 
al | Nh My ay 
fli Ma lu il "hi 
I 


Island 
Bottom 


‘ ts ty ah 


af -27 


_ 
5 


May 93 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb 


Figure 45.4 An island bottom failure. Wait for price to close above the trendline 
before investing in this island bottom. Since it does not (at point ©), skip this trade. 


Figure 45.4 shows another failure. The island bottom is clearly visible on 
the chart. The two gaps separate the main body of the island from the main- 
land with plenty of clear ocean. Over the course of the pattern, the first gap 
remains open. The second gap closes about a week after price throws back to 
the breakout point. Then price continues lower. 


688 Island Reversals 


How could you have known that this island bottom would rise less than 
5% before sinking? 

See that trendline I drew down from the peak on the chart (touching 
point A)? That would scare me out of taking a position in this situation. I recall 
considering buying Southwest Airlines in a similar situation and deciding not 
to because of trendline resistance. Price moved upward, hit the trendline, and 
turned down. So I made the right choice to walk away from buying the stock. 

In the figure, price threw back to the breakout price and continued lower. 

Even if you chose another trendline, connecting peaks B and C, the result 
was the same. Price neared or touched the trendline before reversing. 

We've taken a tour. We’ve discussed failures. Let’s talk numbers now. 


Statistics 


Table 45.2 is swimming with island statistics. 

Number found. I found 2,504 islands without really trying. My selec- 
tions were limited to gaps at least $0.25 in size and no more than $0.13 away 
from each other in price (gap to gap overlap). I found them in 960 stocks 
(about half that for tops and half that for bottoms) from July 1991 to Decem- 
ber 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, all patterns 
acted as reversals of the preceding trend. That means tops broke out down- 
ward and bottoms broke out upward, changing the trend from up to down 
(island tops) and down to up (island bottoms). 

Average rise or decline. The best performance came from upward 
breakouts in bull markets and downward breakouts in bear markets, so trade 


Table 45.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 1,166 182 975 181 
Reversal (R), 100% R 100% R 100% R 100% R 

continuation 

(C) occurrence 
Average rise 31% 20% -13% -22% 

or decline 
Standard & Poor’s 12% 2% -3% -9% 

500 change 
Days to ultimate 196 46 47 36 

high or low 
How many 39% 32% 21% 48% 


change trend? 


Statistics 689 


this pattern with the prevailing market trend. Going against the market is like 
trying to cross a six-lane highway on foot: It is possible but dangerous. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. From the breakout of the island to the 
ultimate high or low, the S&P ranged from a 12% climb to a 9% drop. Notice 
how the numbers track the average rise or decline. I mean that the largest rise 
associates with a large general market gain, and the largest decline (bear mar- 
ket, down breakout) associates with the biggest decline in the S&P. This con- 
nection suggests you should trade with the prevailing market trend. Go long 
in bull markets and short in bear ones. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Patterns in bull markets with upward 
breakouts took more than four times as long as the other combinations to 
reach the ultimate high. 

I compared the rise (upward breakouts) in bull and bear markets. I found 
that the bear market rise of 20% in 46 days was 2.7 times as fast as the 31% 
bull market rise in 196 days. Downward breakouts showed that the bear market 
drop was 2.2 times as fast as the bull market drop. In other words, price velocity 
is substantially higher in bear markets, regardless of the up or down direction. 

How many change trend? I counted how many patterns saw price rise 
more than 20% after the breakout. For upward breakouts, I like to see values 
above 50%. Neither of the first two columns in the table comes close. Of 
course, we know that islands don’t perform well, and this is more proof. 

For downward breakouts, I don’t have a benchmark in mind, but 48% is 
a good value. 

Let’s talk about failure rates next, in Table 45.3, starting with an example. 
In bull markets after upward breakouts from island bottoms, I found that 31% 
of the chart patterns failed to see price rise more than 5%. Nearly half, 46%, 
failed to rise more than 10%. No offense, but that’s awful. 


Table 45.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum 
Price Rise or Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Decline (%) Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 362 or 31% 54 or 30% 329 or 34% 25 or 14% 
10 177 or 46% 35 or 49% 210 or 55% 24 or 27% 
15 101 or 55% 24 or 62% 139 or 70% 30 or 44% 
20 72 or 61% 11 or 68% 93 or 79% 15 or 52% 
25 66 or 67% 9 or 73% 59 or 85% 16 or 61% 
30 51 or 71% 4 or 75% 45 or 90% 18 or 71% 
35 41 or 75% 11 or 81% 32 or 93% 14 or 78% 
50 94 or 83% 18 or 91% 51 or 98% 28 or 94% 
75 82 or 90% 12 or 98% 16 or 100% 11 or 100% 


Over 75 120 0r100% 4or100% 1 or 100% 0 or 100% 


690 


Island Reversals 


For downward breakouts, read the table the same way. In bear markets, 
14% of island tops failed to see price drop more than 5% after the breakout. 
This is the lowest failure rate of the bunch. Over half (52%) failed to see price 
drop more than 20%. 

Notice how the failure rates climb in each column, quickly doubling or 
tripling the breakeven rate. This progression is common for chart patterns. It 
suggests that good performers are hard to find, so you need every break you 
can get. That is why things like trading with the market trend, using stops, 
and selling at a profit when the stock, industry, and general market begin 
showing weakness can spell the difference between a millionaire trader and a 
homeless one. 

Table 45.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. Island bottoms have upward breakouts all of the 
time. Island tops have downward breakouts all of the time, so that’s why you 
see the 100% values in the columns. 


Table 45.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 100% up 100% up 100% down 100% down 
Performance L 34%, L 18%, L-14%, L-21%, 

of breakouts M 28%, M 25%, M -13%, M -23%, 

occurring near H 32% H 14% H -11% H -22% 

the 12-month low 

(L), middle (M), 

or high (H) 
Throwbacks/pull- 54% 52% 55% 58% 


backs occurrence 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


5% in9 days 9%in10days -6%in8days  -11%in9 days 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback ends 


14 days 15 days 14 days 15 days 


Average rise/decline 31% 20% -12% -22% 


for patterns 
with throw- 
backs/pullbacks 


Average rise/decline 31% 19% -13% -23% 


for patterns 
without throw- 
backs/pullbacks 


Percentage price 62% 47% 53% 49% 


resumes trend 


Statistics 691 


Yearly position, performance. Bull markets prefer patterns with break- 
outs within a third of the yearly low. Bear market patterns perform best if the 
breakout is in the middle of the yearly high-low price range. In most cases, 
you will want to avoid trading islands within a third of the yearly high. They 
perform worst, but every situation is different, so use your best judgment. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about half 
the time. Price trends for 8 to 10 days before returning to the breakout price 
in a round-trip excursion lasting about 2 weeks. For other chart pattern types, 
the round-trip is quicker, about 11 or 12 days, peaking after about half that. 

Usually if a throwback or pullback occurs, performance suffers. With 
islands, the performance varies, and it’s tiny or nonexistent anyway. In other 
words, you may not see a difference in performance. 

After a throwback or pullback completes, price resumes the breakout 
direction only about half the time (the exception: 62% of the time for island 
bottoms in bull markets). 

Table 45.5 shows pattern size statistics. 


Table 45.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 

Tall pattern 33% 22% -15% -21% 
performance 

Short pattern 30% 17% -10% -23% 
performance 

Median height as 5.2% 9.6% 5.6% 10.4% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 

Narrow pattern 28% 20% -11% -23% 
performance 

Wide pattern 35% 19% -15% -21% 
performance 

Median width 6 days 6 days 6 days 6 days 

Short and narrow 28% 18% -10% -23% 
performance 

Short and wide 39% 11%* -11% -24% 
performance 

Tall and wide 34% 21% -16% -21% 
performance 

Tall and narrow 32% 29%* -14% —22%* 
performance 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


692 Island Reversals 


Height. I hoped that all columns would show tall patterns outperforming 
short ones, and that’s true except for downward breakouts from island tops in 
bear markets. To determine short or tall, I measured the height of each island 
and divided by the breakout price. Tall patterns had results greater than the 
median shown in the table. 

Width. The results for width follow market conditions. Wide islands 
performed best in bull markets. Narrow islands did well in bear markets. I 
measured width from gap to gap, as you might expect, and all comparisons are 
against the median widths shown in the table. 

Height and width combinations. Because bear markets have few sam- 
ples when split into up or down breakouts and four combinations of height and 
width, let’s ignore them. 

Upward breakouts show the best performance if the pattern is both short 
and wide. That’s odd because tall patterns usually do better than short ones. 
Downward breakouts behave with tall and wide patterns outperforming, just 
as their individual traits predict. 

Table 45.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Island tops and bottoms have a downward volume trend, 
as measured between the two gaps. The receding trend agrees with most other 
chart pattern types. 

Rising/Falling volume. In all columns, patterns with a rising volume 
trend outperform those with a falling volume trend. The performance differ- 
ences are pronounced for island bottoms (upward breakouts). 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume tends to push price along 
the breakout direction more than light volume, except in bear markets after 
downward breakouts (which prefer light volume). 


Table 45.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 79% down 79% down 74% down 74% down 
Rising volume 41% 27% -14% -23% 

trend 

performance 
Falling volume 32% 19% -13% -22% 

trend 

performance 
Heavy breakout 34% 22% -13% -22% 

volume 

performance 
Light breakout 26% 13% -12% -24% 

volume 


performance 


Statistics 693 


Table 45.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. 

I’m surprised that the hit rate for stops is as low as it is (36% to 48%, 
depending on breakout direction). Often we see rates about 70% for other 
chart pattern types. 

Gaps, however, are known support and resistance areas (but weak ones). 
Maybe the combination of a dual gap sharing a common price improves the 
strength. For whatever the reason, the numbers are what they are. 

For example, if you have an island bottom (upward breakout), price will 
return to the pattern’s top 42% to 48% of the time as it searches for the ulti- 
mate high. Similarly, a stop placed at the bottom of an island top will trig- 
ger between 36% and 43% of the time as price looks for the ultimate low. 
Once price finds the ultimate high or low, I stopped checking to see if a trade 
was stopped out, so price might have returned to the pattern thereafter and 
snagged the stop. 

Table 45.8 shows the performance over three decades. Because bear 
markets only occurred in the 2000s, they are excluded from the presentation 
and the statistics. 

Performance over time. Upward breakouts (island bottoms) show bet- 
ter performance over the decades, and downward breakouts (island tops) get 
worse. That’s weird, isn’t it? Hmm. I guess it makes sense that one direction 
would suffer if the other was outperforming. 


Table 45.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Bull Market, Bear Market, —_ Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 48% 42% 7% 6% 
Middle 22% 13% 21% 12% 
Pattern 8% 5% 43% 36% 
bottom 
Table 45.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 26% -15% 
2000s 28% -13% 
2010s 34% -12% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 30% 30% 
2000s 23% 31% 


2010s 33% 36% 


694 Island Reversals 


Failures over time. Downward breakouts show failures increasing over 
the decades, but upward breakouts are mixed. Clearly, though, failures are 
higher in the 2010s than in the prior two decades. 

Table 45.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. I expected more islands to bust. A bust occurs 
when price breaks out in one direction and moves no more than 10% before 
reversing and closing outside the opposite end of the pattern (for a downward 
breakout, price would close above the pattern’s top). 

Busted occurrence. There’s not a lot of bear market patterns, so let’s not 
discuss those. In most chart pattern types, single busted patterns happen a lot, 
with no competition from double or triple busts. With islands, that’s not the 
case. In a bull market, downward breakouts, for example, show three or more 
busts (triple+) as happening most often followed closely by single busts. 

Busted and non-busted performance. My usual guidance is to trade 
single busted patterns if you can find them. However, with islands, the chart 
pattern is more risky because single busts tend to be rarer than usual and the 
performance is lacking anyway. I’d look for another pattern type rather than 
try to trade a busted island. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 45.10 shows trading tactics. With performance so poor, my main ques- 
tion is, why would you want to trade an island? Are you bored of living? Have 
too much money and can’t give it away? Do you know what I hate? Rhetorical 
questions. 

Let’s talk about tactics. 


Table 45.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted pat- 390 or 33% =—§ 46 or 25% 378 or 39% 24 or 13% 

terns count 
Single bust count 150 o0r38% 33 0r72% 179 or 47% 10 or 42% 
Double bust count 142 or 36% 9or20% 18 or 5% 2 or 8% 
Triple+ bust count 98 or 25% 4 or 9% 181 or 48% 12 or 50% 
Performance for all -14% -14% 22% 17% 

busted patterns 
Single busted -21% -18% 42% 42% 

performance 
Non-busted -13% -22% 31% 20% 


performance 


Trading Tactics 695 


Table 45.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height by subtracting the lowest low from the 
highest high in the island. Add the difference to the highest high 
for island bottoms, and subtract the difference from the lowest low 
for island tops. The result is the target to which price should rise (for 
bottoms) or fall (for tops). The bottom portion of the table shows the 
success rate of the measure rule using various heights. 


Watch Trendlines, when pierced, can signal a trend change. Should an island 

trendlines reversal appear near a trendline, wait for price to close beyond the 

trendline before investing. 
Tips See text. 
Bear 
Bull Market, Market, 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Down Down 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Breakout Breakout 
Percentage reaching 94% 91% 81% 80% 

half height target 
Percentage reaching 82% 75% 62% 61% 

full height target 
Percentage reaching 63% 42% 39% 40% 

2x height 
Percentage reaching 50% 29% 26% 31% 

3x height 


Measure rule, targets. The table describes how to use the height of the 
pattern and add the height to upward breakouts or subtract it from downward 
breakouts to get a price target. If the downward target is below zero, then 
ignore it. Similarly, large percentage changes probably won’t happen either, so 
use common sense. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often the rule works. For 
example, if a pattern has a high price of $10 and a low of $9, that’s a height of 
$1. For upward breakouts, the target would be $11 and the downward break- 
out target would be $8. Using the full height would work between 61% and 
82% of the time. For a closer target, take half of the height to get a close target 
of 10.50 or 8.50, in our example. Price reaches the target between 80% and 
94% of the time, on average. 

Let’s apply the measure rule to Figure 45.5. The highest high in the island 
bottom is 24.63 (which is just below the gap in early February, not the larger 
gap in mid-February) while the low is 17.50. Add the difference of 7.13 to the 
highest high to get the predicted price target for an upward breakout. In this 
case, the target is 31.75, a target not reached before the formation fails. 


696 Island Reversals 


As a check, divide the distance to the target by the current price and 
check Table 45.3. In our example, the target is $1 away from $10, or 10% (let’s 
assume an upward breakout in a bull market). 

Table 45.3 says that 46% of the patterns will fail to see price rise more 
than 10%. That also means 54% of them will succeed. No matter how you 
slice or dice the numbers, I don’t like those percentages. 

Watch trendlines. In the Focus on Failures section of this chapter, I 
discussed trendline resistance in detail, so there is not much to add here. How- 
ever, both up and down trendlines can show a trend change. Wait for price to 
close above a down-sloping trendline or below an up-sloping one before pulling 
the trigger. Many times price will near the trendline and be repulsed, so you 
want to make sure that the piercing does, indeed, signal a change in trend. You 
might wait a few days after the trendline pierce to be sure price has pushed 
through trendline support or resistance. 

Tips. For island bottoms, about the only tip I can pass on is to use price 
mirrors for your trading. What does that mean? Imagine that there’s a mirror 
in the middle of the island bottom that reflects what happens to the left of the 
island onto the chart on the right. 

Now set your target accordingly. 


¢ Price mirrors can help determine how price will move in the future. 


For example, say the left side shows a tall peak. Imagine that the right side 
will also show a tall peak, but one that doesn’t quite make it up to the price of 
the left peak (to be conservative). The right peak will be your target. 

Pay attention to the valleys and peaks to the left of the island and project them 
onto the right of the chart so you'll know what the future will bring. Price mirrors 
don’t always work, of course, but they will give you some idea of where price might 
turn. You can use that guidance to set your price target for a swing trade. 

For island tops, you’ll want to look for the closest knot of support below 
the bottom of the island. That knot will be at least 3 days wide, often much 
wider, with lots of price overlap as the stock moves horizontally. That’s your 
target. Use the top price shown in the knot. 

If the first knot is located well below the bottom of the island, then expect 
support about midway down that trend. So cut the distance in half and use that 
as a target. 


¢ Review knots in Chapter 1 for guidance on what they look like and 
how to use them to trade. 


Sample Trade 


Consider the situation faced by Clarence as illustrated in Figure 45.5. He 
watched the semiconductor company’s stock plummet. During November and 


Sample Trade 697 


Cirrus Logic Inc (Semiconductor, NASDAQ, CRUS) 


Down Trend Line 


| Predicted Price Target - 32 

q - 30 
| fh 

| l 1 , ; - 28 

| 4 I | ila! Island \ qy_,-Pay of Highest High 26 

ih Ii I bottom |G in the Island 2 24 

Itsy gt tg ai8 

TY eH alo pom Wingy 18 

-1 


Lowest Low 


Sep 95 Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 45.5 A failed island bottom. Sometimes the best trade you can make is 
none at all. 


December, the stock formed a long island consolidation (I no longer consider 
long islands to be chart patterns worth studying. Long islands have two gaps 
that do not share a common price, such as the one shown in November to 
December). He knew it was not a reversal because the two gaps did not line 
up across from each other. Then another island formed in January through 
early February. 

Since price gapped down to the island and then gapped up away from it, 
“T knew it was an island bottom,” a better investment choice for performance 
than an island top. He used the measure rule to gauge the likely price to which 
the stock would climb. The target represented nearly a 30% rise in price, large 
enough to risk a trade. 

Before he bought the stock, he made a few checks. He saw that the trend 
was down, as the stock had fallen from a high of 61.13 to the island low of 
17.50 (a drop of 71%). 

“T drew a trendline from the highest high downward and saw it go through 
the right island gap. This was a good sign because price had moved above the 
line and closed there. It signaled a possible trend change. However, something 
still bothered me, so I held off buying.” 

The stock made a new low, and the semiconductor industry as a whole 
was soft. Did the island bottom really mark a turning point, or would the stock 
simply rise up, spin around, and retest the low? 

“T wasn’t sure, so I decided to wait for a throwback. If it threw back and 
then continued higher, I would buy the stock.” 


698 Island Reversals 


Three days after the upward breakout, the stock threw back and closed 
the gap. “All it had to do was move higher . . . but it didn’t.” 

The stock continued lower and, in less than a week, had slipped below 
the trendline again. “I decided to look elsewhere for a more promising 
setup.” 

Looking back at the stock well over a year later, he saw that it reached a 
low of 8 and never rose above 27.25, the high just after it pierced the trendline. 
He realized that sometimes the best trade you can make is none at all. 


46 


Measured Move Down 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price moves down, retraces, and then moves down again in a stair-step 
pattern. 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Volume trend 

Average first leg decline 
Average corrective phase retrace 
Average last leg decline 


Percentage meeting price target 


Downward 
20% in 26 days 
48% in 21 days 
21% in 27 days 
43% 


Downward 
31% in 31 days 
46% in 20 days 
34% in 31 days 
38% 


Synonym Swing measurement, simple ABC correction 
See also Bullish AB=CD, flags, pennants 


The measured move down, or swing measurement as it is sometimes called, is 
an exciting chart pattern because it predicts how far down price is going. I use 
measured moves not for the prediction, but for what happens after the pattern 
completes (price returns to the corrective phase). Table 46.5 shows what typi- 
cally happens after the measured move ends. 

Because of the nature of this chart pattern, I do not show the same statis- 
tics as in other chapters, starting with the Results Snapshot. 

The measured move is a drop-retrace-drop pattern. The theory is that 
the second drop will equal the first one in both time and price. The above 
results show the measurements. 


699 


700 Measured Move Down 


In bull markets, the first leg of the pattern sees price drop an average 
of 20% in 26 days. The second leg sees price drop an average of 21% in 27 
days. That might sound like the pattern works, because both price (20% versus 
21%) and time (26 days versus 27 days) moves are similar. However, if you 
calculate the price change (not percentage change) of the first leg and check 
it with the second leg, you'll see the second leg will be equal to or longer then 
the first leg only 43% of the time. 

The bear market numbers show the results aren’t as tidy as in bull mar- 
kets, but they are close. The stock takes a bit longer to drop farther, and yet the 
two legs are almost equal. 

Nestled between the first and second legs is the corrective phase, which 
sees price retrace a portion of the first leg decline. 

Let’s show some pictures so you can understand what this pattern looks 
like. If you haven’t met a measured move before, you might want to put on 
your Sunday best. 


Tour 


Figure 46.1 shows what a measured move down looks like. The decline from 
the high (point A) to the start of the retrace (point C) is called the first leg. The 
retrace (CD) is commonly referred to as the corrective phase, and the remain- 
ing decline to the low (D to the end of the trendline at E) is called the second 
leg. The first and second legs are nearly the same size, but their behavior is 
described in more detail later in the Statistics section. 


Fleetwood Enterprises (Manuf. Housing/Rec. Veh., NYSE, FLE) 


Corrective 
Phase 


Mar 92 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 46.1 A typical measured move down. The slope of the trendline is similar 
for both legs. Points A, B, and C mark a nested measured move. 


Identification Guidelines 701 


The corrective phase is simply an upward retrace of the downtrend. It is 
a place for the stock to catch its breath and for novice investors to buy into the 
situation. They purchase the stock and push it up, believing the decline is at an 
end. Sometimes they are correct, but in this case the decline is only half over. 
That is the beauty of this chart pattern. Before you buy a stock after a decline, 
consider that it might be making a measured move down and that the decline 
is not over. Paying attention might save you some big bucks. 

Returning to the figure, you can see the two legs follow a trendline that 
has nearly the same slope. This is not always the case, but a surprising number 
of patterns obey this idea. Further, a channel—two parallel lines that follow 
price down—can encompass the two legs. Although the example is weak on the 
first leg, you can see how the second leg follows a top trendline (not drawn), 
connecting points D and E and extending down. 

Lastly, the three points marked A, B, and C mark a nested (one pattern 
inside the other) measured move down. This one is more compact, and it is 
common to find nested patterns like this. Sometimes you get one measured 
move right after another (sequential instead of nested), too. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 46.1 highlights identification characteristics for the measured move 
down chart pattern. 


Table 46.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price declines in a stair-step manner, in three parts: the first leg decline, 
an upward retrace, and a resumption of the decline. 


First leg Usually begins from a new high. Price declines rapidly in a straight-line 
fashion. Avoid declines that curve (they are rounding turns, scallops, 
or saucers). 


Corrective Price can move horizontally but usually retraces a portion of the first leg 
phase before resuming the downtrend. If the corrective phase rises above 
the first leg high, look elsewhere. 


Second leg The slope of the first leg down often carries onto this leg. Both legs usu- 
ally fit inside their own price channels. 


Avoid For sequential measured moves, use the first retrace and not later ones 
as they get progressively closer to the end of the trend. Make sure the 
measure rule does not predict price will fall below zero. 


Flags, pennants These patterns have a flagpole that is a strong move down as the first 
leg, and a corrective phase that lasts no longer than 3 weeks (which 
becomes a flag or pennant). In well-behaved patterns, the second leg 
continues in the same direction as the first leg. 


702 Measured Move Down 


Appearance. The pattern looks like a downward stair-step with one tread 
between the two drops. Price declines in the first leg, retraces a portion of the 
first leg during the corrective phase, and resumes the downward price trend in 
the second portion of the chart pattern. 

First leg. The first leg begins when price reaches a new high and a trend 
change begins. Price declines, leaving a peak on the chart. From there, price 
continues lower, usually in a straight-line run down. Most times you can draw 
two parallel lines, one connecting the minor highs and another joining the 
minor lows, forming a down-sloping trend channel. 

Corrective phase. The corrective phase stops the decline. Price can 
move horizontally, but usually retraces a portion of the losses of the first leg. 

Second leg. When the second leg begins, the downturn resumes. Price 
usually follows the slope set by the first leg, but this varies from pattern to 
pattern. Of course, the two legs will not share the same trendline because the 
corrective phase offsets them. Even so, the second leg usually fits inside its 
own trend channel as price declines in a straight-line fashion. The second leg 
decline approximates the price decline set by the first leg and the time it took 
to accomplish it (in theory). 

Avoid. There are several guidelines that you should follow when search- 
ing for a measured move down. Avoid patterns that show a rounded first leg, 
where price moves lower but curves around in a sort of rounding turn, scallop, 
or saucer. The trend should be a straight-line decline. 

During the corrective phase, price should not rebound far enough to 
exceed the high set by the first leg. If price rises above the first leg high, then 
avoid the chart pattern. It’s not a measured move down. 

Watch for consecutive measured moves in a declining price trend. The 
downtrend will end eventually, so it is best to trade on the first or second meas- 
ured moves and ignore the rest. 

The last caveat is to consider the measure rule. I discuss the measure rule 
in the Trading ‘Tactics section of this chapter, but the rule says the second leg 
will approximate the move of the first leg. If the first leg has a large decline, 
you may find that the predicted price is very close to zero or perhaps even neg- 
ative. Obviously, the stock is not going to go negative and will probably remain 
far above zero, so you might look elsewhere for a more promising trade. 

Flags, pennants. Flags and pennants share the same type of pattern as a 
measured move down. The first leg is a very fast decline, forming the flagpole. 
In a measured move, the drop isn’t as fast or as steep in the first leg. It usually 
lasts much longer, too (but this varies). 

A flag looks like a rectangle (with two nearly parallel trendlines) usually 
tilted against the prevailing price trend, and a pennant has two trendlines that 
converge. A measured move down has a looser-looking price movement in the 
corrective phase. The phase often lasts longer than a flag or pennant. 

After the retrace in a downtrend (that is, after the corrective phase ends), 
flags, pennants, and measured moves see price drop again (when they act as 


Identification Guidelines 703 


they should). Again the move in a flag or pennant is steep and fast in the second 
leg with price tumbling down in an attempt to reach zero, now! In a measured 
move down, it’s a straight-line run down, but often at a more leisurely pace. 

Visit the chapters on flags and pennants and look at the accompanying 
figures so you can get a better sense for what separates the measured move 
down from other chart patterns. 

Figure 46.2 shows two examples of the measured move down. The first 
one, marked by points A, B, C, and D, begins after a long price rise. The stock 
moves up to peak at 59.63 in early July (A). Price declines following a down 
trendline but stays within a channel until mid-August, when it reaches a low 
of 51.50 (B). 

The corrective phase begins (BC) on volume that is high but not unusu- 
ally so. Price moves up and retraces 68% of the decline before tumbling again. 

In the second leg (CD), price drops below the low set by the first leg 
(point B) and continues lower to point D. At turn D, the pattern ends. 

The second leg is steeper than the first leg and covers the ground in 
about half the time (36 days versus 19 days). In addition, the second leg is 
slightly shorter than the first one (the first leg declines by 8.13 orl4%, whereas 
the second one falls 7.25 or 13%). 

Another measured move occurs in mid-November and ends at about the 
same level as the first one in late January (see points E, F, G, and H). If you look 
closely at the figure, you can see another measured move that forms in the first 
leg from point E to point F. Points El and E2 mark the corrective phase. Also 


Air Products and Chemicals Inc (Chemical (Diversified), NYSE, APD) 


i 
Y 


Jun 95 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar 


Figure 46.2 Notice how measured move ABCD has legs that fit inside channels. 
With well-behaved measured moves, the price decline from C to D nearly matches 
the decline from A to B. 


704 Measured Move Down 


notice that price recovers to G (near the middle of corrective phase E1-E2) 
before dropping again. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 46.3 shows a failure of a measured move to see an extensive second 
leg decline. 

The potential measured move down starts at peak A. Price drops in a 
straight-line run lower, looking as if a flag or pennant might appear along the 
trend. However, just past the midway part of the trend, the stock bends to the 
right. The straight-line run down isn’t straight anymore. That’s a warning that 
this measured move might not be as perfect as we hope. (Avoid relying on 
measured moves when price curves during creation of the first leg.) 

Price touches down at B and bounces to C. The BC bounce looks pro- 
portional to the AB drop, which is important. I understand that it’s hard to 
quantify what proportional means, but it’s like pornography. You know it when 
you see it. In other words, the BC retrace isn’t too small or too large for the 
downtrend (okay, maybe it’s a bit small). 

Leg one is in place: AB. The corrective phase is there, too: BC. After peak 
C completes, the stock starts heading lower in the second leg, just as it should 
in well-behaved measured moves. 

But the drop only makes it down to D before the stock turns and climbs 
above the top of the corrective phase, C, suggesting the pattern is a failure. 

If leg two is supposed to be as long as leg one, this pattern falls well short. The 
AB drop measures $5.48. The CD drop is $1.11 and well short of the AB move. 


Beazer Homes USA, Inc (BZH) 


19 Feb = Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 20 


Figure 46.3 This potential measured move down fails to see price drop in the 
second leg. 


Statistics 705 


What went wrong? 

Let’s back up to point A. The big spike down at A is the result of 
second-quarter results reported by the company after the market closed the 
day before. Investors in the stock didn’t like the news, and down the stock went. 

Notice that the move from A to C lasted about a month and a half. I’ve 
noticed in my trading that about 1.5 months before the end of the quarter 
(midway in the quarter, that is), the stock starts to move in anticipation of the 
next earnings announcement. The smart money begins adjusting their port- 
folio to appease holders. Fund managers want to show investors that they are 
into the hot stocks and are avoiding the underdogs. Maybe we’re seeing that 
here, only the reverse. 

The smart money starts to nibble on the stock, sensing a beaten down stock 
with problems that will be fixed by the start of the next quarter. Maybe the com- 
pany wasn’t able to close a big deal that quarter and would seal the deal shortly. 
That’s the kind of reasoning traders use to justify taking a position in a fallen angel. 

In August, the company announces earnings and price peaks at I, a 
day after the announcement (in the middle of a nice-looking diamond top, 
by the way). 

In the meantime, the stock didn’t complete the measured move down. 
Indeed, it formed an ugly double bottom at BD (a pattern where the two bot- 
toms are far apart in price instead of bottoming near the same price). 

Because bottom D remained above B, it was a bullish sign of good things 
to come. The measured move failed to see price drop in the second leg. Instead, 
the stock recovered from the disastrous earnings report, handing a failure to 
the measured move down. 


Statistics 


Table 46.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,380 measured moves with the first appearing 
in August 1991 and the most recent in January 2015 in 853 stocks, but not all 
stocks covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. 


Table 46.2 
General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 962 418 
Average length (days) 76 83 
Median first leg decline -18% in 17 days -27% in 23 days 
Median corrective phase retrace 46% in 15 days 45% in 16 days 


Median last leg decline -18% in 16 days -31% in 23 days 


706 Measured Move Down 


Average length. The average length of a measured move is about 11 
or 12 weeks. 

Performance. The Results Snapshot (chapter start) shows the average 
first-leg, corrective phase, and second-leg values, so I decided to provide you 
with the median values in Table 46.2. 

The first leg is about equal to the second leg in both bull and bear mar- 
kets. For example, in bull markets price drops 18% in 17 days to form the 
first leg. The second leg takes price down another 18%, and it does it one day 
quicker: 16 days. 

The table shows the median retrace between the two legs (the corrective 
phase). The numbers say the stock climbs back almost halfway up the first leg 
in about 2 weeks. 

Table 46.3 shows volume statistics. 

Volume trend. Price trends downward in the pattern between 74% and 
76% of the time on average. 

Average success rate. If you ignore volume and just measure how often 
the price drop in the second leg meets or exceeds the drop in the first leg, 
we see it’s successful 43% of the time in bull markets, or 38% of the time in 
bear markets. 

Rising/Falling volume. If you sort the success rate by volume trend, 
we see patterns with a rising volume trend outperforming those with a falling 
trend, quite substantially, too. 

For example, in bull markets I found that measured moves with a rising 
volume trend (found using linear regression from the start to the end of the 
pattern) reached the measure rule target 51% of the time. That’s an improve- 
ment over 40% of them with a falling volume trend. 


Table 46.3 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 76% down 74% down 
Average success rate (leg 2 >= leg 1) 43% 38% 
Rising volume trend and success 51% 52% 
Falling volume trend and success 40% 33% 

Table 46.4 

Success Over Time for Bull Markets 

Description Bull Market 
1990s 42% 
2000s 41% 


2010s 47% 


Statistics 707 


Is this finding useful? It might appear so, but consider how I found the 
volume trend. I measured it from the start of the measured move to its end. 
Thus, you'll know (for sure) if volume is rising or falling only after the pattern 
completes. 

Sigh. 

However, if you see volume well above average in the first leg, then assume 
that volume in the second leg will be less (you'll have a falling volume trend). 

If you see volume below average in the first leg and the corrective phase 
sees increased volume, then you might conclude that volume will rise through- 
out the pattern. If that’s the case, then the probability increases that the meas- 
ure rule will work as expected. 

Table 46.4 shows how often price reached the measure rule target over 
three decades. Because the bear markets only appeared in the 2000s, they are 
not included in the table or in the statistics. 

The percentages in the table show how often the second leg met or 
exceeded the price move of the first leg (not on a percentage bases but dollar 
for dollar). 

The measured move has shown improved performance in the 2010s, 
slightly above the performance of the other two decades. 

For Table 46.5, I programmed my computer to find what happened after 
the measured move finished (after the second leg). Let’s discuss the bull market 
numbers, but you interpret the bear market results the same way. 

I found that 23% of the patterns remained below the bottom of the cor- 
rective phase. Using Figure 46.2 as a reference, the stock remained below the 
price of B. 

The corrective phase is BC, and I found that 28% climbed that high 
before reversing. Another 15% climbed above C but below the top of the pat- 
tern (A). The rest, 33%, saw price rise above the top of the pattern. 

The numbers are additive. For example, we know that 51% (23% + 28%) 
of the patterns will see price remain below C. Sixty-seven percent will remain 
below the top of the pattern (rounded upward). 

What does this mean? If you see a measured move down appear in a 
stock, there’s a 77% chance that price will rise into the corrective phase (that is, 
23% remain below the corrective phase). That’s valuable trading information. 


Table 46.5 
Where Does Price Stop? 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Above pattern top 33% 29% 
Above corrective phase, below top 15% 17% 
Within corrective phase 28% 35% 


Below corrective phase 23% 18% 


708 Measured Move Down 


Trading Tactics 


Table 46.6 outlines trading tactics for measured moves. 

Measure rule. Use the measure rule to help predict how far price will 
decline. Refer to Figure 46.5 during the discussion of its computation. In 
the figure, four letters outline the measured move: A through D. First, tabu- 
late the height of the first leg (shown by points A and B) by subtracting the 
lowest low (42) from the highest high (52.88). This gives a height of 10.88. 
Subtract the height from the highest high in the corrective phase (point C 
at 47.75). The result is a target price of 36.87. Price meets the target on 
7 December. 

That computation uses the full height of the first leg. The bottom portion 
of the table shows how often the measure rule works using various heights. If 
you were to use half the height of the first leg in the computation, it would 
work almost all of the time, as the table shows (93% to 97%). 

Corrective phase. After a measured move down completes, the correc- 
tive phase often acts like a magnet, attracting price. It’s a dependable location 
to sell an existing holding. See Table 46.5 to learn that there’s a 77% (bull 
market) to 82% (bear market) chance of the stock moving into the corrective 
phase. To put it another way, only 23% (bull market) and 18% (bear market) 
see price remaining below the bottom of the corrective phase. 


Experience 
Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Table 46.6 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the length of the first leg from the highest high to the lowest 
low (at the start of the corrective phase). Subtract the result from 
the highest high reached in the corrective phase to get the target 
price. The bottom portion of the table shows the success rate using 
various heights. 


Corrective Refer to Table 46.5 to see where price may stop rising. 

phase 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 97% 93% 
Percentage reaching .75 height target 72% 68% 


Percentage reaching full height target 43% 38% 


Experience 709 


Assurant Inc. 


Figure 46.4 shows a trade I made using a measured move down pattern in Assurant 
Inc. (AIZ). The measured move begins at A and ends at D. The first leg is AB, a drop 
of 6.54. The corrective phase, BC, tows price back up before the second leg begins. 
The second leg, CD, posts a drop of 9.26, far exceeding the length of the first leg. 

Here’s what I wrote in my notebook about the entry: “16 June 2012. Buy 
reason: This is near the yearly low, resting on support. I think it’s a buy, but 
the company has troubles going forward. They are buying back shares but 
still have to get their act together. If a good quarter comes in, this could pop. 
I expect the stock to ease upward. The leg 1 drop was about 6.50 points and leg 
2 was about 9, so it’s due for a rebound.” 

My computer calculated the position size as 5/8 of a full position, so that’s 
what I bought. The sizing is based on the market and stock’s volatility. I bought 
at the market open (filled at E, 33.66) with a volatility stop calculated at 31.85 
or 6% below, but this was an anticipated long-term holding, so I never placed 
the stop. I do that for buy-and-hold situations like this one. 

Targets were 39, 42, and 56, which are locations of overhead resistance 
set up by prior peaks, with support at 32, which is just below the low at D. 

I think the 39 target is because it’s in the corrective phase of the measured 
move. That’s often an easy target to reach. 


¢ Lesson: After the measured move completes, use a climb back to the 
corrective phase as part of a short-term swing trade. 


As the trade progressed, an ascending broadening wedge formed at F 
I describe a trade using that pattern in Chapter 12, Broadening Wedges, 
Ascending. 


Assurant Inc (AIZ) 


-— 32 
12 Feb Mar Apr May Jun = Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan13 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 46.4 This measured move up led to a profitable trade. 


710 Measured Move Down 


After a choppy beginning where the wedge appeared, the stock started 
trending and climbed all the way to G. Here’s my notes on the sale: “14 Sep- 
tember 2013. Sell reason: This has reached my sell target of 56. I'll sell half 
and see what happens to the other half. According to [a report from analysts at] 
Ford, the stock is trading at the top of the 5-year high-low PE [price/earnings 
ratio] band. PSR [price/sales ratio] is 0.47 but near the top (0.50) of the 5-year 
high-low band. Vickers [says] insiders are selling. None are buying, but the 
amounts, for the most part, are small.” 

I sold and received a fill at 55.94 for a gain of 69% with a hold time of 
about 15 months. 

The stock paused for about a month before resuming the uptrend. 

My notes claim that I bought in at the perfect time (I’m not sure how I 
could have timed the entry better). 

As for the exit, the 56 level was a resistance area and I sold right as the 
stock peaked. But as I mentioned, the stock continued to go higher, and that’s 
fine. I still owned part of my holdings that I picked up as part of the broaden- 
ing wedge trade. 


¢ Lesson: Selling when price reaches a target, if properly chosen, can be 
the smart move. 


Michaels Stores 


In mid-2004, I sold part of my holdings in Michaels Stores (MIK), right as a 
measured move down ended. I expected the stock to go lower, based on what I 
thought would be a nested measured move down. The pattern never appeared, 
but if it had, it would have predicted an additional drop of about 8%. 

The day I sold, the stock hit bottom (I hate it when that happens). From 
there, price moved up 97% in just over a year. Oops. Thank goodness I only 
sold a part of my shares and hung onto the rest. 


¢ Lesson: Trying to predict when a measured move down will occur can 
be difficult. 


Energy Select Sector SPDR Fund 


In 2019, I owned the Energy Select Sector SPDR fund (XLE), an exchange- 
traded fund in the energy sector. I knew energy stocks were weak, so I 
decided to sell my shares. The stock completed a measured move down and 
when price returned to the corrective phase of the measure move, I sold it at 
63.54 in late June 2019. The stock went lower from there, going into August, 
reaching a short-term low of 55.55. The stock ultimately dropped to 22.88 
in March 2020, or 64% lower (because of a price war and a glut of oil due to 
Covid-19). 


Sample Trade 711 


What these trades describe is how I use the measured move to predict 
how far price will recover. I use the pattern defensively for stocks I own. 

I no longer try to predict where the measured move will bottom. Rather, 
once I see a completed measured move, I know where price will go (a rise back 
into the corrective phase). 


¢ Lesson: A good place to sell a weak stock is when price bounces back 
to the corrective phase. 


Sample Trade 


People are nasty; just ask Eddy. He is an airline reservation agent. Between 
the company monitoring his phone calls to be sure he peddles a car and hotel 
when appropriate and the people screaming at him from the other end of the 
phone, it is a tough living. There is nothing he can do about equipment prob- 
lems, lost luggage, or weather, but people do not seem to care. Even the full 
moon gets into the act because that is when the crazies call. 

What he would really like to do is invest in the stock market. He does it 
now, but to a limited extent, because of a cash-flow problem. Fortunately, with 
a few clicks of his computer mouse he can flip to the Internet and monitor his 
latest stock pick when he is not busy. 

That is how he uncovered the situation shown in Figure 46.5. “I watched 
the stock climb from a low of about 10 in June 1994 [not shown] to a high of 
53.63 in October 1995. Every so often, I’d draw trendlines along the bottoms 


3 Com Corp (Computers & Peripherals, NASDAQ, COMS) 


I I | Most Recent Up Trend Line f a 


Resistance 
Stock | 


Support, 
Resistance | 
Level 


Target Price, | | 
Out D - 36 


Position Closed 


Oct 95 Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar 


Figure 46.5 Measured move down followed by corrective phase. Eddy made $5 
per share trading this (points A-D) measured move down. 


712 Measured Move Down 


and watch how the upward trend seemed to be accelerating [the trendlines 
grew steeper over time].” 

Since he knew this could not last, he was ready for a trend change, which 
occurred on 14 November when price pierced the trendline, moving down. 

Instead of shorting the stock immediately, “I decided to wait for a pull- 
back. Much to my surprise it never came.” 

Price moved steadily lower until it reached a support level at 42. From 
that point on, price rose higher for the next week and a half. Then, it dropped 
sharply, tumbling $3 in one session. 

When price fell, it pierced a small up trendline, drawn along the bottoms 
of the climb from points B to C. “I saw what was happening when I drew the 
trendline. The stock was making a measured move down, so I shorted the 
beast at 42.” 

He used the measure rule to compute the predicted price move (high 
at A minus the low at B for the height, subtracted from the high at C to get 
D) and placed an order with his broker to cover the short at the predicted 
price (36.88). “Just 3 days after I placed the trade, the stock reached my target. 
I made about $5 a share or 12%.” 

If you look at Figure 46.5, you can see that price rose to the level of the 
corrective phase bottom (point B), then retreated 2 days after Eddy completed 
his trade. Later on you can see that price also stopped rising at the top of the 
corrective phase (“Resistance”). The corrective phase is a zone of support and 
resistance. 


47 


Measured Move Up 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price moves up, retraces, and then moves up again in a stair-step pattern. 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Average first leg rise 36% in 38 days 38% in 24 days 
Average corrective phase retrace 48% in 27 days 49% in 21 days 
Average last leg rise 31% in 33 days 32% in 23 days 
Percentage meeting price target 60% 52% 
Synonym Swing measurement 
See also Bearish AB=CD, flags, pennants 


The measured move up is the reverse of the measured move down but with 
worse performance. The measured move up has three parts: (1) a first leg that 
sees price rise in a straight-line run, (2) a retrace that captures part of the first 
leg move, and (3) a second leg that sees price resume the upward move. In a 
perfect world, the first and second legs would be the same length. That’s what 
the measure rule for this chart pattern says. 

However, the percentage rise in the first leg during bull markets is 16% 
longer than the second leg (a rise of 36% versus 31%, respectively). Even on 
a calendar basis, the first leg is about 15% longer (38 days versus 33 days). In 
bear markets, the first leg is longer than the second one when they should be 
the same length. 


713 


714 Measured Move Up 


Using the first leg height (in dollars), projected upward from the bot- 
tom of the corrective phase to get a price target, works only 52% to 60% 
of the time. 

What all this information means is that when predicting a price target, 
be conservative. I’ll talk more about this in Trading Tactics and elsewhere in 
this chapter. 


Tour 


Figure 47.1 shows a measured move up chart pattern with the three com- 
ponents labeled. The first leg sees price following a trendline. Many times a 
trendline drawn on either side of the minor highs and lows constructs a chan- 
nel (which I didn’t do in this example). 

The corrective phase retraces a substantial portion of the rise, usually 
40% to 60%, before price resumes rising. In the figure, the corrective phase 
begins in late January and extends through most of February. Price retraces 
55% of the first leg price move. 

Once the correction completes, price climbs even more rapidly during 
the second leg (in this example). You can see that price bows upward instead 
of touching the trendline in a sort of rounding-over maneuver before topping 
out in June. The rise constitutes what is commonly called the second leg. The 
second leg is the rise from the bottom of the corrective phase to the end of the 
chart pattern. 


Allegheny Ludlum Corp (Steel (General), NYSE, ALS) 


-24 
-23 


wh -22 


[- 21 


| 
Kt 


at 
td Vapaplenen 


Nov 92 Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 47.1 A measured move up. The second leg gain nearly matches the gain 
posted by the first leg. 


Identification Guidelines 715 


Once the pattern completes, price sometimes returns to the corrective 
phase or lower. In this example, you can see that price dropped to just below 
the top of the corrective phase (in July) before recovering. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 47.1 lists identification guidelines for this chart pattern. 

Appearance. The pattern begins life by seeing the stock rise in a strong 
push higher. This forms the first leg, and it’s often a straight-line run upward. 
Price retraces in the corrective phase as if pausing to rest. Then the rise 
resumes and forms the second leg. The rise-retrace-rise pattern becomes the 
measured move up. 

First and second leg. Consider Figure 47.2. In the two legs, you’re 
looking for a straight-line run upward. If you see a pronounced curve in the 
first leg, then look elsewhere for a new measured move. 

Often the rise will fit inside a channel. I don’t show any channel lines in 
this figure, but imagine drawing another trendline parallel to the first one con- 
necting the minor highs and see that the first leg fits inside a channel. 

The second leg does even better. The bottom trendline touches several 
places, and a parallel top trendline (not shown for clarity) also intersects the 
minor highs nicely. 

Often you'll see trendlines drawn along the minor lows of the two 
legs sharing nearly the same slope. It is somewhat surprising how often this 


Table 47.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price rises in a straight-line run upward in the first leg, pauses and 
retraces in the corrective phase, and resumes the uptrend in the 
second leg. The combination looks like a stair-step rise. 


First leg Price often follows a channel upward before entering the corrective 
phase. The first leg is a strong, straight-line push upward. 
Corrective Price declines, usually between 40% to 60% of the first leg move, before 
phase heading upward again. The retrace is usually proportional to the first 


leg rise: Large retraces follow large rises. Sometimes the corrective 
phase resembles a saw-tooth pattern (a few sharp rises and declines in 
a row) before price breaks away and zooms upward. This saw-tooth 
pattern usually associates with a long price climb leading to the 
measured move. 


Second leg Price rises, loosely following the slope of the trendline set by the first leg. 
Price commonly fits inside a channel as it rises, but this behavior is not 
a prerequisite. 

Avoid Avoid patterns where the retrace travels too far down the first leg. 
Anything beyond an 80% retrace is too far and too risky to invest in. 


716 Measured Move Up 


Applied Power (Machinery (Const./Mining), NYSE, APW) 


Pen 


“hey, 


Figure 47.2 A falling wedge marks the corrective phase in this measured move 
up. Note the receding volume trend of the wedge. 


observation holds true. However, just because there is a wide variation in the 
trend slope is no reason to eliminate a measured move from consideration. 

Corrective phase. In this example, a falling wedge composes the correc- 
tive phase (which is unusual). The wedge makes trading this measured move 
easy since it predicts a price rise. 

Once price breaks out upward from the wedge, buy into the stock and ride 
the upward move. If you bought the stock following this procedure, you would 
make somewhere between 15% and 20%, depending on when you traded the 
stock. That is not a bad return for a hold time of about 6 weeks. Also note the 
very distinctive down-sloping volume trend for the falling wedge. 

In this example, the corrective phase sees price retrace the first leg move 
by 40%, within the usual 40% to 60% range (allow retraces outside of this 
range). Sometimes when the rise leading to the start of the measured move is 
extensive, the corrective phase becomes long and choppy, resembling a saw- 
tooth pattern marked by quick rises and sharp declines. In such a case, it might 
be prudent to wait for price to rise above the high established during the first 
leg before investing. That way you can avoid the most common measured 
move failure. 

Avoid. You want to avoid measured moves with corrective phases that 
descend too near the first leg start. I do not have a set amount for this retrace, 
but I would probably steer away from chart patterns that retrace more than 
80% or so of the prior upward move. 

In addition, if the first leg does not follow a straight course upward or if 
it fails to stay within a well-defined channel, you might want to look elsewhere 


Focus on Failures 717 


for a more promising situation. Sometimes when a chart pattern does not fee/ 
right or look right, then it is giving you a warning to stay away. Since measured 
moves are a common chart pattern, you can easily find another opportunity. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 47.3 shows the most common type of measured move up failure. The 
stock forms a double top that kills the second leg rise. The second leg does not 
near the price move of the first leg as do most well-behaved measured moves. 

Why does this particular example fail? The figure shows a choppy, hori- 
zontal saw-tooth pattern leading to the first leg rise. The first leg soars above 
the two tops of the saw-tooth and price moves up smartly. Then price rounds 
over and starts correcting. The figure at this point reminds me of a mini- 
bump-and-run reversal. However, the bump phase does not meet the two- 
to-one height ratio of the lead-in phase. Still, it does give you pause about 
investing in this situation. 

The second leg starts rising with no significant change in volume. This 
is a warning sign. There is a common Street axiom that says rising prices need 
high volume, but falling prices can decline on their own weight. This forma- 
tion appears to be an example of that axiom. 

Since there is little upward buying pressure to push price higher, momen- 
tum fades out just below the prior top and then price tumbles. The resulting 
decline sees price fall below the start of the first leg. 


Fleet Financial Group Inc (Bank, NYSE, FLT) 


2 Double Top ; . 

i! I -37 

| i - 36 

I 3 Y 


hi i) 


-31 


ai 
hl r 


—_— 
— 
—<—_ 
—_—. 


-29 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 47.3. A measured move up that fails after turning into a double top. 


718 Measured Move Up 


Before we move on to statistics, I want to alert you to some identification 
problems. When price rises steadily for a long time, say over a year or more, 
and then begins a measured move up, the corrective phase might be exces- 
sively choppy. 

Also, do not be too quick to buy into the situation. Remember that the 
corrective phase should be proportional to the first leg rise. By that I mean 
price should fall anywhere from 40% to 60% of the first leg move before 
beginning the second leg. If price only falls 15% before turning up, then it 
might be a false breakout. 

Sometimes prior peaks are a key to how far price retraces. The peaks 
are often places of support. When price declines to that level, it pauses and 
moves horizontally for a time before continuing down or rebounding. Volume 
is often a key to the level of support you can expect from these types of situa- 
tions. A prior peak with high turnover will give more support to a stock on its 
way down. That is not to say that the stock will not burn through support, just 
that it might take more of a push to fall off the cliff. 


Statistics 


The tables in this section differ from those in other chapters because of the 
uniqueness of this chart pattern. Many of the statistics provided elsewhere do 
not apply because there is no breakout and no ultimate low or high. Success 
is measured by how often the second leg meets or exceeds the length of the 
first leg. 

Table 47.2 shows general statistics for measured moves. 

Number found. Measured moves are as plentiful as ants near spilled 
sugar, except when you need a good example for a book you're writing. I found 
1,338 patterns in 870 stocks from January 1991 to December 2014, but not all 
stocks covered the entire range. Some no longer trade, too. 

Average length. Measured moves have no time limit (if it’s less than 3 
weeks from leg to leg, it might be better classified as a flag or pennant). 


Table 47.2 
General Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,038 300 
Average length (days) 99 69 


Median first leg rise 
Median corrective phase retrace 


Median last leg rise 


26% in 21 days 
47% in 19 days 
24% in 20 days 


31% in 18 days 
48% in 15 days 
27% in 17 days 


Statistics 719 


The average length is about 2 to 3 months, depending on market condi- 
tions. Bear markets have price that moves faster than bull markets, so maybe 
that accounts for the shorter duration. 

Performance. The Results Snapshot shows the average behavior of meas- 
ured moves, so I’m showing the median move in the table. 

Let’s compare the bull market move of the first and second legs. Price 
rises 26% in the first leg in 21 days and nearly the same amount in the second 
leg. It appears that the two legs are nearly the same size, both in price and time. 
The Results Snapshot averages show it’s not as clear as that, and it gets worse if 
you translate the percentage moves into dollar moves. What seems like almost 
identical legs shows that the second leg is shorter than the first leg 60% of the 
time (in bull markets). 

The corrective phase retrace sees price capture almost half of the first leg 
move, and taking almost the same amount of time to do it, too. 

Table 47.3 shows volume statistics. 

Volume trend. Most of the measured moves have a falling volume trend 
as measured from the start of the chart pattern to the end. Don’t throw away 
a chart pattern just because it has an unusual volume trend unless you have a 
good reason for doing so. 

Average success rate. If you ignore volume and just measure how often 
the price rise in the second leg meets or exceeds the rise in the first leg, we see 
it’s successful 41% of the time in bull markets, and 48% of the time in bear 
markets. We’ll use this “success” measure to compare performance in this table 
and the next one. 

Rising/Falling volume. Measured moves with a falling volume trend 
(I used linear regression on volume to get the trend, from the first leg to the 
last) outperform those patterns with a rising volume trend, and quite dramati- 
cally, too. 

For example, measured moves with a falling volume trend in bull markets 
saw the second leg meet or exceed the length of the first leg 45% of the time 
compared to 35% if volume trended upward in the pattern. 

Unfortunately, you won’t know if volume is trending up or down until the 
pattern is complete. Sigh. Of course, you can guess. If volume is high during 
the first leg, higher than what you see in prior weeks or months, then there’s a 
good chance volume will trend lower in the second half of the pattern. 


Table 47.3 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 67% down 72% down 
Average success rate (leg 2 >= leg 1) 41% 48% 
Rising volume trend and success 35% 43% 


Falling volume trend and success 45% 50% 


720 Measured Move Up 


Table 47.4 
Success Over Time for Bull Markets 

Description Bull Market 
1990s 44% 
2000s 37% 
2010s 40% 

Table 47.5 

Where Does Price Stop? 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Above corrective phase 43% 34% 
Within corrective phase 31% 33% 
Below corrective phase 12% 13% 
Below pattern bottom 15% 20% 


Table 47.4 shows how often the second leg met or exceeded the move 
in the first leg over the decades. The worst performance was in the 2000s, and 
the best was in the 1990s. 

Table 47.5 shows where price declined to after the pattern ended. For 
example, price remained above the top of the corrective phase almost half the 
time (43%) in bull markets. Almost a third of the time, the stock returned to 
the corrective phase and didn’t drop any lower. 

The numbers are additive. If 43% remain above the corrective phase, that 
means 57% (31% + 12% + 15%, rounded off) moved into the corrective phase 
or continued lower. You can use these numbers to help predict where the stock 
might go after the pattern ends. 

I find that kind of information invaluable. It’s how I use measured moves 
in my trading. I know that price will return to the corrective phase over half 
the time, so it helps me predict where the stock is going to go. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 47.6 shows trading tactics for measured move up patterns. 

Measure rule. The measure rule predicts the level to which price may 
rise. Io estimate the target price, compute the height of the first leg. Let’s use 
the measured move up shown in Figure 47.4 as an example. 

Locate the highest high in the first leg. Usually this is somewhere near 
the beginning of the corrective phase, and point A indicates this in the fig- 
ure. From this value (21.13), subtract the lowest low (14.13) in the first leg, 
shown as point B. The difference (7) is the height of the first leg. Add it to 


Trading Tactics 721 


Table 47.6 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Calculate the height of the first leg from highest high to lowest 
low. Add the difference to the lowest low in the corrective phase. 
The result is the expected target price. The lower portion of the 
table shows how often the measure rule works using various pat- 
tern heights. 


Buy Take a position in the stock sometime after the corrective phase com- 
pletes and price rises during the second leg. 
Support/ The corrective phase shows future support or resistance. 
resistance 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 99% 100% 
Percentage reaching .75 height target 91% 89% 
Percentage reaching full height target 60% 52% 


point C (18.38)—or the lowest low in the corrective phase—to arrive at the 
target price. In this case, the target price is 25.38. Price reaches the target just 
10 trading days after the corrective phase ends. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works 
depending on the height used. In the above example, we used the full height. 
The table shows the full height works 60% of the time in bull markets. 

If you want to increase the potential for success, cut the height in half 
or three quarters and use that in the computation. You'll get a closer target. If 
price reaches the target, you won’t make as much if you sell there, but you may 
be able to bank a profit. 

Once you calculate the target price using the measure rule, ask yourself if the 
gain is large enough to justify a trade. If the answer is yes, then look at the chart 
again. Are there areas of resistance on the way to the target price where the stock 
might get hung up? Ifso, you might need to lower your target. If you are lucky and 
significant resistance is above your target, you can move your target upward to just 
below the resistance zone. In all likelihood the stock will shoot into the resistance 
zone, so you will have ample opportunity to close out your position. 

Buy. After price leaves the corrective phase, then buy the stock. To gauge 
the breakout point, draw a down-sloping trendline along the minor highs in 
the corrective phase. Once price closes above the trendline, then buy the stock. 

A more conservative approach is to buy when price closes above the peak 
in the first leg or corrective phase (the higher of the two), instead of a trend- 
line pierce. 

As the stock approaches the target price, do not be too quick to sell. If 
the stock is on a roll, go with the flow and wait for price to start declining. 


722 Measured Move Up 


Obviously, if price pauses near but below the target price, then it might be wise 
to sell. Often a limit order set at the full height target works well (at least for 
me, in bull markets). 

Support/resistance. After the measured move ends, price will retrace, 
sometimes returning all the way down to the corrective phase before meeting 
any meaningful support. It may pause at the top of the corrective phase or drop 
to the bottom of it. Sometimes, price just sails right on through. Whatever the 
case, be aware that if you do not sell near the target price and decide to hold 
on, you might lose all of your gains. 


Experience 


I have used the measured move up for both buying and selling. 

When buying a stock, I'll see a stock make a strong swing higher, forming 
the first leg of what I believe will be a measured move up. Price retraces in the 
corrective phase, and on the exit, I’m there with a buy order. I’ve entered trades 
this way a number of times. 

I calculate the full height target. Here’s where I go astray. Instead of plac- 
ing a sell order at the target, I sell before price meets the target. In Englehard 
(EC), the stock never hit the target and I was lucky to get out when I did. The 
stock dropped dramatically after I sold. In Genworth Financial (GNW), the 
stock climbed to the target and then dropped in half. Wow. 

In Standard Products (SPD), I bought after the corrective phase ended 
and rode the stock higher, but sold short of the target. I missed a buyout offer 
for the company by a month. In a similar case, Hawaiian Electric (HE), I sold 
at the measure rule target, expecting a retrace to the corrective phase that 
never happened. Two months later, the company received a buyout offer. 

In Tesoro Petroleum (TSO) and Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold 
(FCX), I bought the corrective phase breakout and the stock reached the meas- 
ure rule target almost exactly. In fact, 71% of the time in my stock picks, the 
measured move up saw price hit the projected price target. That doesn’t mean 
the measured move works better than expected (60% of the time in bull mar- 
kets), it’s that I was able to select candidates that worked better than average. 

In Principal Financial Group (PFG), I bought in right at the top of the sec- 
ond leg and watched as price dropped back to the corrective phase. I predicted 
the drop would happen, too. At least I got that right even though I took a loss. 

In Steelcase (SCS), I measured the height of the first leg and found it to 
be 36%. That’s an unrealistic move to expect in the second leg. Indeed, the 
stock climbed 14% and then died, handing me a tidy loss. 

What I learned is this. 


¢ Lesson: Make sure the first leg rise is a reasonable percentage. Values 
too high mean an unrealistic second leg move. The median first leg 


Sample Trade 723 


rise is 26%. Oddly, if the first leg rise is more than the median, the suc- 
cess rate rises to 46% from 36% for those patterns with smaller first 
leg moves. 

¢ Lesson: Do buy in as price exits the corrective phase. 

¢ Lesson: Use a limit order to sell at the target. If you’re lucky, it’ll hit 
and price will drop thereafter. 

¢ Lesson: Before buying a stock (not because you see a measured move, 
but at other times), check to see if a measured move pattern has com- 
pleted near the buy price. If yes, then price might retrace to the correc- 
tive phase before rebounding (or it may just keep dropping). 

¢ Lesson: If you own a stock and are contemplating selling, see if a meas- 
ure move is in the works. If so, try to sell near the end (high) of the 
second leg. 


Sample Trade 


Michelle is an engineer. Over the years, she has developed a thick skin to take 
the ribbing from fellow college students in a male-dominated profession. Even 
after she graduated and ventured into the professional world, the ribbing con- 
tinued. She is pretty, and the guys just wanted her attention. I saw this firsthand 
when I stopped by her office with a question. She was not there at the time, 
but her desk blotter had the scribblings of love notes from dozens of men. 
Of course, I added my own, but I digress. 

If you were to give a Rubic’s cube to Michelle, she would not try to solve 
it. She would take it apart to see how it was constructed. That kind of inquisi- 
tiveness coupled with her ability to solve tough problems in a distinctive way 
makes her special even among engineers. She is also an investor with the same 
qualities. 

Michelle used a unique approach to take advantage of the situation shown 
in Figure 47.4. “I owned the stock but worried about performance.” During 
the prior November-to-February period (not shown), she saw the stock form a 
double top. Price declined from a high of 24.13 to the low of 14.13 at the start 
of the measured move (B). 

“I should have sold after the stock confirmed the double top. Instead, 
I rode the stock down and lost 41% of my gains. They’re around here some- 
where,” she spread her arms wide to encompass the office, “but I haven’t found 
them yet.” She smiled and dimples appeared on her cheeks. “I'll do better 
next time.” 

When the stock started its climb (B), she saw the increase in volume. The 
increase meant that the run would be an extended one, because there seemed 
to be enough enthusiasm to send price higher. “That was my hope, anyway. 
Could have been a wish, though.” 


724 Measured Move Up 
Pacific Scientific (Precision Instruments, NYSE, PSX) 


hh Ee 
in, 3 


u 
Target Price | | 


ay | 

seaanyco— My a ee 

Ss trical = 
ane yh a ad ae 
. i an 

lose | 

aa] | ne 
; Ww Corrective Phase Support Zone | 19 


Jun 95 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 47.4 Measured move up with a symmetrical triangle. As described in the 
Sample Trade, Michelle rode this measured move up in a stock she owned. She 
sold when the breakaway gap closed. The symmetrical triangle shows a typical 
receding volume trend. 


All bull runs must pause now and again, and this situation was no differ- 
ent. “The stock paused and consolidated for nearly all of July [A to C].” 

She looked back at the chart and noticed that the stock had reached a 
zone of resistance where there were several old highs that stalled near 21. Vol- 
ume picked up, and when price shot upward, she immediately recognized the 
measured move pattern. 

“Did you sell?” I asked. 

She shook her head. Michelle calculated that the stock would rise to 
25.38, a new yearly high. “I thought the stock might hit resistance at the old 
high of 24, and that’s what happened.” 

A symmetrical triangle formed. The pattern obeyed the rules for sym- 
metrical triangles, lower highs, and higher lows with a receding volume trend, 
and she was confident that she had correctly identified it. 

Since there was no way to tell which direction the stock would break out 
of the triangle, she waited for the breakout. “It was a tennis match with the 
price ball bouncing up and down in the triangle. Then the stock gapped out 
the top of the pattern. Yippee! I felt as if I had won the point.” 

Was the gap a breakaway gap or an exhaustion gap? “The answer was 
critical.” Because the gap appeared just after a region of consolidation, it was 
most likely a breakaway gap, so price would continue rising, but how far? 


Sample Trade 725 


She hoped the triangle represented the halfway mark of an uptrend. She 
knew that symmetrical triangles sometimes act as half-staff patterns, so she 
expected a climb to 28 (see the measure rule for symmetrical triangles). “Yes, it 
was a long shot but one worth taking.” Her calculated price target of 25.38 was 
met the day price jumped out of the triangle. 

About a week later, the stock reached a new high and then fell back. 
“When price closed the gap in the first part of September, I decided to sell. 
Fortunately, the next day price zoomed upward and I was able to sell at 24.50, 
near the daily high of 25.13. That felt good.” 

After that, the stock tumbled back to the middle of the corrective phase, 
right in the center of the support zone. Then the stock recovered. “Did I sell 
too soon? I looked at the chart 6 months later and saw price hovering in the 
$15 range.” She winked at me. “I did good.” 


48 


Pennants 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price forms a straight-line run (flagpole) of several day’s duration. Then 
the stock pauses, often retracing a portion of its move, forming a short triangle pattern 
(the pennant) bounded by two converging trendlines. 


Upward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or Short-term bullish continuation Short-term bullish 

continuation continuation 
Breakeven 54% 40% 

failure rate 
Average rise 7% 10% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Percentage meeting 35% 46% 

price target 
See also Flags; flags, high and tight; triangles, symmetrical bottoms; 


triangles, symmetrical tops; wedges, falling; wedges, rising 


726 


Tour 727 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bear- Short-term bearish 
ish reversal continuation 
Breakeven failure rate 54% 32% 
Average drop 6% 13% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Percentage meeting 32% 40% 


price target 


Pennants are short consolidation patterns that appear in a strong price trend 
(the flagpole). Their shape is triangular, shown by two converging trendlines, 
but the triangle lines can slope upward, downward, or even sideways. Most of 
the time, the tilt will be against the flagpole trend. For example, if the flagpole 
sees price rise, the pennant will often tilt downward like a small falling wedge. 

Pennants tend to be short, several days, but I allow up to 3 weeks. Any- 
thing longer than that is better classified as a symmetrical triangle or wedge 
(rising or falling). 

Active swing traders may use flags and pennants in their trading. Like 
flags, pennants serve as half-staff patterns. The theory is that the price trend 
after the pennant will be as long as or longer than the trend before the pen- 
nant. Does it work? No. I’ll explain that the pennant appears about 55% to 
57% of the way along the trend. 

The percentage meeting the price target (the “measure rule”) in the 
Results Snapshot shows a more brutal assessment. Only 32% to 46% will see 
a post-pennant move equal to or longer than the flagpole. 

Let’s take a quick tour to see what a pennant looks like, how to identify it, 
why it fails, and tear it apart using out statistical teeth. 


Tour 


Figure 48.1 shows an example of a pennant in a downward price trend. I show 
the pennant bounded by two converging trendlines in the middle of the figure. 
However, the entire pattern actually begins days before the trendlines. 

Price eases lower in November and into the start of December. A flag- 
pole, upon which all pennants hang, begins with the straight-line run down 
that’s fast. In 4 days, the stock tumbles from about 25 to 20, retraces to create 
the pennant, and resumes the downward plunge when price gaps (breakaway 
gap) lower in January. 


728 Pennants 


Circuit City Stores (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, CC) 
— 28 


"lal _27 


~ 26 
ph =” ~25 


-24 


| | - 23 
| -22 

i" ¥ yr Mgnt -21 

|, - 20 


pt 
phtlyHl Was peels iyt -19 


(ht -18 


Nov 93 Dec Jan 94 Feb Mar 


Figure 48.1 A pennant bounded by two converging trendlines looks like a short 
rising wedge. 


In a pennant, two sloping trendlines eventually meet to resemble a small 
wedge or triangle. Sometimes the trendlines slope upward, as in the figure, and 
sometimes they do not. Usually, they slope (tilt) upward in a downtrend and 
downward in an uptrend (that is, against the prevailing trend). 

Volume trends downward in this example, and that’s the case in the vast 
majority of pennants. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 48.1 shows identification characteristics for pennants, and Figure 48.2 
shows an example. 

Appearance. When looking for pennants, I search first for a strong price 
trend, which becomes the flagpole. Then I look for price to hesitate along the 
way where the price trend converges and forms a pennant shape. The pennant 
may slope upward, downward, or look horizontal, but it usually slopes against 
the prevailing price trend. For example, the pennant in Figure 48.1 slopes 
upward, and the one in Figure 48.2 slopes downward. Both slope against the 
prevailing price trend but need not. 

Price trend (flagpole). Look for a steep, quick price move leading to 
the pennant. This feature is important, and it has the side benefit of making 
pennant spotting easier. The straight-line run can be up or down and should 
be several points (but it depends on the price of the stock) for several days. 


Identification Guidelines 729 


Table 48.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Two trendlines surrounding the price action converge, forming a small 
pennant shape. Price usually tilts against the flagpole trend: It rises in 
a downtrend and falls in an uptrend. After the pennant completes, 
price often resumes the price trend set by the flagpole. 


Price Pennants can form near the midpoint of a steep, quick price trend. If 
trend, flagpole = you do not have a flagpole, then ignore the pennant. 
Volume Volume usually trends downward throughout the pattern. Do not dis- 
card a pennant because it has an unusual volume trend. 
Breakout Can be in any direction but often follows the flagpole trend (the 
direction pennant acts as a continuation pattern). 
Duration Pennants are short patterns lasting from a few days to 3 weeks. 


Patterns longer than 3 weeks are symmetrical triangles or wedges. 


Adobe Systems (Computer Software & Svcs., NASDAQ, ADBE) 


, >| 
I -28 
Minor Highs | -27 


iH 23 


Pennant Uptrend Begins _22 


t 
1 gutta ah 
tl 
I 


Mar93 Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 48.2 A short pennant forms after a quick price rise. The pennant slopes 
downward and price moves upward after leaving the pennant. 


The best moves have price with little overlap from day to day, emphasizing the 
speed of the move. 

The figure shows the start of the flagpole (“Pennant Uptrend Begins”). 
The pole ends at the top left of the pennant. 

Volume. Most of the time, pennants will have a downward volume trend, 
but do not exclude a pattern because volume slopes upward. 


730 Pennants 


Breakout direction. Price breaks out of the pennant when it closes out- 
side one of the pennant’s trendline boundaries. Price can slide out the pen- 
nant’s apex, but it’ll eventually close above the top or below the bottom of the 
pennant to force a breakout. Sometimes, you may wish to wait for price to 
exceed the flagpole top before considering taking a position. 

Duration. The 3-week maximum is an arbitrary limit. Pennants can 
range in length from a few days to 3 weeks. A pattern longer than 3 weeks is 
better classified as a symmetrical triangle, or rising or falling wedge. The pen- 
nants I looked at averaged 8 days long (not including the flagpole). 

Figure 48.3 shows a small pennant carried along in a downward price 
trend. Price undershoots the pattern (for 2 days) at the start, but the pennant 
still acts as a continuation of the downward price trend. Notice how the pen- 
nant slopes against the 2-day upward rise. After the pattern completes, price 
gaps down (breakaway gap). 

Reviewing the identification guidelines, the pennant pattern is clear in 
the figure if you know what to look for. Price narrows over time. Notice the 
steep decline leading to the pattern (the flagpole, starting at about 17) and the 
slope of the price trend after the breakout—the two are nearly identical. In 
that regard, pennants function like small measured move (up or down) chart 
patterns. Volume recedes between the pennant ends. 

This is a valid pennant. 


Frontier Airline, Inc (Air Transport, NASDAQ, FRNT) 
p 
hy 
I" 
I I 
Trend Start 
i 
' at bine Ik ut 
me aly 4 tle 


lini Het 


I 


| Pennant 


1otrorot tt titre 
= 
N 


if I 
= 
0 oO 


I ; 
In | | Hi | Ht 
i u i! , i M My = 7 


Trend End 


, 
al i i \ i M i { - 6 


| 


Hy, 
“ny 


wr | 


- 4 


02 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec —_Jan03 


Figure 48.3. The downward price trend overshoots the small pennant on entry. 
The pattern appears almost midway between the trend start and end. 


Focus on Failures 731 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 48.4 shows a failure of a pennant in a downtrend. The pennant prob- 
ably reminds you of a short symmetrical triangle—one that acts as a reversal. 
‘Two trendlines bound price action for several days, outlining the narrow- 
ing pattern. 

The flagpole leading down to the pennant represents an 18% decline. 
Volume recedes (in the pennant), as you would expect. Price should continue 
moving lower after this pennant breaks out but doesn’t. Why? 

I don’t know. 

You can see in the figure that price loops around the formation end and 
then heads lower, forming a throwback. If you held onto your short position, 
you would eventually make money. However, I still classify this pennant as a 
failure. Why? 

The answer is not because the pennant broke out upward in a downtrend. 
Rather the stock failed to see price move far enough to equal the height of the 
flagpole. If the pennant worked as it’s supposed to, you would see the stock 
climb back to the price of the highest peak on the chart, 55.75. Instead, price 
climbs to just 50.63 before heading lower. 

How often does the pennant work as a half-staff pattern (meaning it 
appears midway in the price trend)? Let’s crunch the numbers to find out. 


Alza (Drug, NYSE, AZA) 

i Upward Breakout 54 
I” 3 
' plutl ~$0 
im! | z 
a | oy 


4 | I ty I -45 
i H ed | \ His a {" 44 
lI ‘| 


4 


Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 48.4 This pennant looks like a small symmetrical triangle. Price breaks out 
upward, throws back to the formation, and heads lower. 


732 Pennants 


Statistics 


‘To measure performance, I used the short-term trend start and trend end. See 
Figure 48.3 for the labels of the two. I did not look for the ultimate low/high 
and a 20% price change, but stopped when the price trend ended at a minor 
low or high. I wanted to see if pennants acted as half-staff patterns. Notice how 
the pennant in the figure is almost in the middle of the downward price trend 
located by the Trend Start and Trend End labels. The pennant shows how they 
should behave. 

Table 48.2 shows general statistics for pennants. 

Number found. I found 2,106 pennants in 734 stocks with the first 
found in October 1991 and the most recent in December 2019. Not all stocks 
covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) performance. Most of the pennants act 
as continuations of the prevailing price trend. That means price drops into the 
pattern and exits down, or the reverse, an upward trend and upward breakout. 
Only in bull markets after downward breakouts do we see reversals happening 
more often than continuations. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Mapping performance shows 
continuation patterns outperforming reversals in three of four columns. 
The exception is after upward breakouts in bear markets, but the numbers 
are close. 


Table 48.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout) Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 949 207 728 222 


Reversal (R), con- 24% R, 76% C 25%R, 75% C 55% R, 45% C 26% R, 74% C 
tinuation (C) 
occurrence 
Reversal, 5% R, 7% C 11% R, 10% C -5% R, -8% C -7% R, -14% C 
continuation 
performance 
Average rise 7% 10% -6% -13% 
or decline 
Standard 2% 2% -2% -5% 
& Poor's 
500 change 
Days to trend 9 9 8 8 
high or low 


Statistics 733 


Average rise or decline. Don’t even think of comparing the average rise 
or decline with other chart patterns (except for flags), due to the way I meas- 
ured performance (as I explained). 

What the table shows is that if you trade the pattern perfectly and often 
enough, you won’t make very much. Bear market performance is better than 
bull market performance, so keep that in mind. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. This table shows the influence of the 
general market trend on performance. That’s really hard to prove, but if the 
general market is rising, it tends to lift all boats. Similarly, a falling market sucks 
boats down. Notice that the S&P lost 5% in bear markets and pennants with 
downward breakouts in that market performed the best of the four columns. 

Days to trend high or low. This measure shows the average time price 
took to reach the trend high or low after the breakout. On average, you can 
make 10% in about 2 weeks (bear market, up breakout) if you trade pennants 
perfectly and often enough. That’s not too bad. Of course, you won’t trade it 
perfectly and probably not 207 times, either, so your results will vary. 

I removed Table 48.3 because failure rates don’t make much sense when 
you're looking at the move to the trend end versus the ultimate high or low 
(for other chart patterns). 

Table 48.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction favors upward breakouts in 
bull markets and downward breakouts in bear markets. I like how that makes 
intuitive sense, even though the percentages are close to random. 


Table 48.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout 57% up 48% up 43% down 52% down 

direction 
Performance L 7%, M 7%, L 13%, M 8%, L-8%, M-6%,  L-15%, M-12%, 

of breakouts H 7% H 10% H -5% H-5% 


occurring near 
the 12-month 
low (L), 
middle (M), 
or high (H) 


Performance 7% 11% 5% -15% 
with break- 
out day gap 

Performance 7% 10% 6% -12% 
without break- 
out day gap 


Average gap size $0.41 $0.45 $0.67 $1.07 


734 Pennants 


Yearly position, performance. The best performing pennants occur 
within a third of the yearly low. Yes, the bull market after an upward breakout 
shows a tie, but the others prefer the yearly low. Downward breakouts do worst 
if the breakout is within a third of the yearly high. 

Gaps. I measured performance from the breakout price (the opening 
price the day after the gap) to the trend end. The performance difference 
between gaps and no gaps is negligible except for downward breakouts in bear 
markets. If the stock shows a breakout day gap, performance improves enough 
to be worth considering them. 

Table 48.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform substantially better than short ones. The 
largest difference occurs for pennants in bear markets after downward break- 
outs. To measure height, I used the pennant only (not including the flagpole), 
from highest peak to lowest valley and divided by the breakout price. Those 
with values greater than the median shown in the table for their respective 
markets and breakout directions were tall. 


Table 48.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern 9% 13% -8% -17% 
performance 
Short pattern 4% 7% -4% -9% 
performance 
Median height as 4.2% 6.7% 4.3% 7.3% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 6% 10% -6% -10% 
performance 
Wide pattern 8% 11% -7% -15% 
performance 
Median width 7 days 8 days 6 days 6 days 
Short and narrow 4% 8% -5% -7% 
performance 
Short and wide 5% 6% -3% -10% 
performance 
Tall and wide 10% 14% -9% -19% 
performance 
Tall and narrow 8% 13% -7% -13% 


performance 


Statistics 735 


Width. Wide pennants perform better than narrow ones, but the per- 
formance difference is small except for downward breakouts in bear markets. 

For example, pennants in bull markets with upward breakouts and a 
length narrower than the median saw price climb 6% after the breakout. Wide 
pennants climbed an average of 8%. 

Height and width combinations. Looking at the combinations of 
height and width, we find that pennants both tall and wide outperform the 
other combinations. That makes sense because each column shows perfor- 
mance improves if a pattern is tall (one test) and wide (another test). You'll 
want to avoid short patterns. 

Table 48.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward in the pennant most of the 
time. Don’t throw away a pennant because volume trends upward. You may be 
tossing away a better performing pennant. 

Rising/Falling volume, breakout day volume. A rising volume trend 
over the length of the pennant suggests better performance after a breakout 
(bull markets, upward breakouts show a tie, but the other columns do better). 
Heavy breakout volume predicts better performance on average. 

Table 48.7 is supposed to show how often price reaches a stop location. 
Because I measure the move from the breakout to the trend end (the next near- 
est minor high or low), a straight-line run, the stop location will not trigger 
until after the trend ends. So I removed the table from this chapter. It’s not 
meaningful. 

Table 48.8 shows the performance over three decades using the breakout 
to trend end performance measure, not the move to the ultimate high or low 
(just a reminder). Because bear markets only occurred in the 2000s, they are 
not included in the statistics. 


Table 48.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 86% down 92% down 88% down 86% down 
Rising vol- 7% 12% -7% -14% 

ume trend 

performance 
Falling vol- 7% 10% -6% -12% 

ume trend 

performance 
Heavy break- 8% 11% -7% -13% 

out volume 

performance 
Light break- 6% 10% -6% -12% 

out volume 


performance 


736 Pennants 


Table 48.8 
Performance Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 10% 9% 
2000s 7% -6% 
2010s 4% —5% 


Performance was best in the 1990s and worst in the 2010s. 
Table 48.9 is supposed to show busted pattern performance, but it doesn’t 
apply to pennants, so I don’t show it (less work for me. Yippee!). 


Trading Tactics 


Table 48.10 shows trading tactics for pennants. 

Measure rule. Use the measure rule to help predict a price target. 
Figure 48.6 shows an example. The trend starts at point A and climbs to the 
pennant. Take the difference between the top (intraday high) of the pennant at 
its start (B at 10.69) and the trend start low (point A, at 7.50) to get the flagpole 
height of 3.19. Add this value to the intraday low at the pennant end (point 
C at 11.44, the day before the breakout) to get the price target (14.63). Price 
climbs to the target 3 days after the breakout. 

How often does this work? Page back to the Results Snapshot at the 
start of this chapter. You’ll see that the measure rule (percentage meeting price 
target) works between 32% and 46% of the time. It performs worse in bull 
markets than in bear markets, but it’s still well below what I like to see. It’s 
more accurate to say it doesn’t work the majority of the time. I’ll refine that 
assessment in Table 48.12. 


Table 48.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Calculate the price difference between the start of the trend and the 
start of the pennant. Price should move at slightly less than this 
amount above (for uptrends) or below (for downtrends) the end of 
the pennant. 


Wait Take a position in the stock once price closes outside the pen- 
for breakout nant boundary. 


Close out trade Close out the trade when price stalls, usually as it approaches the meas- 
ure rule target or a support/resistance zone. 


Trading Tactics 737 


Wait for breakout. Since pennants do act as reversals occasionally, it is best 
to wait for the breakout. A breakout occurs when price closes outside the pennant 
boundary. Only then should you take a position in the stock. Do not procrasti- 
nate, because delays may be costly. You may wish to place a trade at the pennant 
trendline boundary to get into the trade faster, but it’s more risky (false breakouts). 
A more conservative approach is to wait for price to close above the top of the 
flagpole (assuming price in the flagpole trends up and the pennant slopes down). 

Close out the trade. Price should move in the direction of the prevail- 
ing price trend (Table 48.2 says about 75% of the time except for one column), 
usually following a slope similar to that before the pennant. When price falters 
(pauses) after several days (7 calendar days is the median) of quick price move- 
ment, sell (or be prepared to sell). 

Table 48.11 shows how pennant tilt affects performance. 

I checked performance of the pennant depending on the pattern’s tilt. For 
example, Figure 48.3 has a downward tilt and Figure 48.6 is upward. I didn’t 
count those with horizontal tilts like that shown in Figure 48.4. 

The numbers show that downward tilts outperform those with upward 
tilts after upward breakouts. The reverse is true for downward breakouts: 
Upward tilts work best in that situation. 

Table 48.12 shows special features of pennants. That’s not really true. It’s 
more special measurements I made associated with pennants. 

I measured the price and time moves before and after the pennant but for 
only two configurations: rising price trend, upward breakout, downward pen- 
nant tilt (top portion of the table) and falling price trend, downward breakout, 
and upward tilt (bottom portion). 

Let’s talk about the top half of the table, and you can apply the same logic 
to the lower portion of the table. 

Time move. The flagpole lasted 11 days, on average, but the move after 
the pennant was 9 or 10 days. So the pennant will appear slightly (55%) beyond 
midway in the time trend. 

Price move. The average price rise in the flagpole in bull markets was 
19%. That compared to an after-pennant move of 14%. On a percentage basis, 
the pennant is past the midway point (58% along, where 50% means midway). 

Multipliers. This item uses the results of the prior rows to figure out 
how much to multiply the flagpole to get a better estimate of how long and 
how far the stock might move. 


Table 48.11 
Pennant Tilt 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tilt up, 5% 9% -7% -15% 
performance 
Tilt down, 7% 11% -6% -13% 


performance 


738 Pennants 


Table 48.12 

Special Features 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Rising price trend, upward breakout, downward pennant tilt 
Flagpole days 11 11 
Breakout to trend end, days 10 9 
Flagpole price move 19% 25% 
Breakout to trend end, price move 14% 20% 
Time multiplier 48% 45% 
Price multiplier 42% 44% 
Falling price trend, downward breakout, upward pennant tilt (below) 
Flagpole days 10 11 
Breakout to trend end, days 9 9 
Flagpole price move 17% 22% 
Breakout to trend end, price move 14% 23% 
Time multiplier 47% 45% 
Price multiplier 45% 51% 


For example, suppose you see a pennant with a flagpole height of $5 in a 
stock trading at $26. The flagpole is 5/26 or 19% of the current price. I know 
from the table that the move after the flagpole is 14% along a combined height 
of 19% + 14% or 33% high. So 14/33 is 42%. 

If I take 42% of $5 and add it to the breakout price, I should get a better 
estimate of how far price might rise. If the breakout is at $25 (price retraced 
a dollar in the pennant before breaking out upward), the target would be 25 + 
$5 x 42% or 27.10. 

How long will it take to reach the target? Say it took 11 days to rise to 
the top of the flagpole. The time multiplier is 10/(11 + 10) or 48%. So I'd take 
48% of 11 days (or 6 days, rounded up) and that’s what I would add to the 
breakout date. If it’s a weekend, then you’re on your own. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Coherent 


It’s one thing to lose money, but to do it quickly always bugs me. Like this pen- 
nant trade in Coherent (COHR), shown in Figure 48.5. 

I found an event pattern called an earnings flag. The stock made a breaka- 
way gap up on stronger than expected earnings. The flagpole begins at A and 
ends at B. Price retraced and made a pennant pattern, not a flag. 


Experience 739 


Coherent (COHR) 


ult , OA = 
| ae 
i] | mt i | | _24 
all Mg -23 
| \ - 


ft -21 
-20 
03 Nov Dec Jan 04 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 48.5 Here’s a quick way to lose money trading a pennant. 


Here’s my notebook entry for the trade: “6 February 2004. I bought, 
filled at 30.30 and 30.39. This is an earnings flag trade. I waited for a retrace 
because of a weak general market. Price may retrace further, but I expect a 
renewed climb. 

“Downside is 50% retrace to 27.50—28. Thatis also the site of the August— 
November 2003 peaks. Expect a rise to 35. This could stall at 34 according to 
point and figure chart. At 35, this goes up against a long-term down trendline 
from the March, July peaks in 2000. According to the 1-2-3 trend change rule, 
the stock is poised to move up. It pierced the down trendline [1], retested the 
low [2], and is now breaking out to new highs [3].” 

I bought at C, the day the stock broke out upward from the pennant, or 
what would become a pennant (shown as the two diagonal and converging 
trendlines). I may have thought the 3-day move after B formed the pennant. 
If that was the case, the pennant broke out downward, reversed, and busted the 
downward breakout at C. 

A week later, I was scribbling in my notebook again: “12 February 2004. 
The Dow [industrials] was up 123 points yesterday, and this stock hardly 
moved. ‘Today, it has broken out downward from a pennant. Time to cut the 
loss. I'll sell at the market open tomorrow. This stock did not do as I expected, 
so it’s time to sell.” 

I sold at D and lost 4% in 8 days. The stock dropped, pulled back to E, 
and then continued lower. 

As an earnings flag trade it was a dud, not because I lost money, but 
because the stock failed to climb after the earnings announcement formed the 
pennant. However, you can see that price bottomed in December and climbed 
to A where earnings were announced. That’s a big move by the smart money 


740 Pennants 


before the company let everyone else in on the news. So how much was left to 
push the stock higher? Price gapped up and then became quicksand. 


¢ Lesson: In this case, waiting for price to close above the top of the flag- 
pole would have avoided the trade and the small loss. 
¢ Lesson: Ifa stock does not do what you expect, then exit. Fast. 


Duriron 


The company was called Duriron (DURJ when I bought it, but it’s now called 
Flowserve (FLS). Let me describe how I botched the trade in the stock. You 
can use me as a cautionary bedtime story for the kids: Don’t try this at home. 

The stock made a strong but sedate push upward that lasted over a 
year. Price peaked in September 1995, moved sideways for 3 months, and 
then dropped in a fast move down. It bounced back up to the bottom of that 
3-month sideways move and formed the pennant. In other words, overhead 
resistance was blocking an upward move. Wish I’d recognized that at the time. 


¢ Lesson: Look for underlying support and overhead resistance to better 
gauge how far price might move. 


From my notebook: “14 January 1996. The stock is forming a pennant 
formation. The measure of this is $4. This also happens to be on the bottom 
of the trend channel. I am going to buy and pray. If the pennant succeeds, this 
should give me about a [tidy] profit. Should I continue to hold for the duration 
of the channel swing, the profit could [double]. The stop-loss level, at $22.25, 
is just below the low of the recent dip. I think this might be a better channel 
play than a pennant play.” 

The day I bought is the day the stock broke out downward from 
the pennant. 


¢ Lesson: Sell on an adverse breakout. 


Three days later, I wrote, “I expect to be stopped out of this stock tomor- 
row as it closed at 22 3/4 and my stop is for 22 1/4. There is a lesson here, and 
that is, if the formation and your expectations of its performance go wrong, sell 
it. In this case, the pennant formation broke down on high volume when the 
stock dropped 3/4 of a point after purchase. I should have sold as the forma- 
tion’s volume indications were now wrong.” 

A week later, 23 January, I wrote: “I was stopped out of the stock today at 
$22. I lowered the stop by 1/8 point from 22.25 to 22 1/8. The decline seems 
to have caught me. As I watched the stock each day, it rose in the morning and 
fell in the last hour (except today: it sank from the beginning). It looked to me 
like manipulation as some mutual fund sold shares in the afternoon, forcing 


Sample Trade 741 


the price down for whatever reason. Well, I should have sold the stock after the 
pennant broke down. Instead, I now have a loss. Live and learn.” 


¢ Lesson: Never lower a stop-loss order. 


I took a loss of 15% in 8 days and made several mistakes along the way. 
The stock bottomed on the day I sold and five days later, started closing higher, 
forming a new uptrend. The stock continued rising and pushed well above the 
top of the pennant, to end where it peaked back in September 1995. 


Sample Trade 


Consider the situation illustrated in Figure 48.6. The pennant obeys the iden- 
tification guidelines shown in Table 48.1.’ The pennant looks odd because price 
trends upward in the pennant instead of declining. In that regard, the pennant 
is unusual, but it is still a pennant. 

A key to this trade is the flat base. It started in early 1999, and a portion 
of it appears in the figure. Many technical traders look for this type of situa- 
tion—a heavy volume breakout after a long horizontal move. They say that the 
longer the base, the more powerful the move up. Based on this example alone, 
I would have to agree. 


Administaff Inc (Human Resources, NYSE, ASF) 


sell I 7 
. | “6 
; Jo: 
it | Py 

i = 
i Wi, 12 


Pennant 

- 11 
B—| 

- 10 


rl Te, 
l, \ ' 
IM, Ny, | Nooupf engl 
| iP ‘ af Mono ! ha, 1 \ | ‘ \" 
‘woe ely! 


Target 


Buy 


Flat Base 


" ‘thy a 


99 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan0O Feb Mar 


Figure 48.6 Use the measure rule to predict a price target. Take the difference 
from the low at point A (the trend start) to the high at B (the pennant start) and 
project it upward from the low at C (before the breakout). 


742 Pennants 


You can see how price punched through the base’s ceiling on high volume 
and then coasted higher, forming the pennant. Once price shot out the top 
(a close outside the pennant trendline), the stage was set for a trade. 

Many technical traders would have entered this trade on the breakout 
from the base (when price closed above the base’s top), allowing them to profit 
on the ride up. Using the pennant as a measure rule sell signal would be a 
bonus (if it worked as a half-staff pattern and we know it only does less than 
half the time). 

Suppose you saw the pennant form and watched price break out upward. 
The next day, you would buy at the market open, filled at 12.53, which was also 
the intraday low. 

Price rises toward the measure rule target of 14.63 (see the measure rule 
explanation in Trading Tactics for the numbers). Stay in the trade as price 
makes higher highs. You can place an order to sell near or at the target so the 
market will take you out automatically. That order usually results in selling 
near a minor high and gives you a higher profit than trying to time it yourself. 

In this case, since price was trending up, stay in the trade. When price 
closed lower and made a lower high, that was the sell signal. Sell at the market 
open the next day, 14.69, which just happened to be the intraday low. That 
strategy would give you a profit of 17% in just 4 days for this trade. 

After completing the throwback (where price returned to the pennant), 
the stock continued higher, reaching a high of 44.56 in mid-September 2000 
(not shown) for a rise of over 400% above the base top. 

Clearly, not all trades work out as well as this one. The key is getting into 
the trade at a low price and exiting in a timely manner (near the top). A delay 
of just a few days and you would be selling into the downdraft as price tumbled 
back toward the pennant. 


49 


Pipe Bottoms 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Two adjacent and unusually long downward price spikes on the weekly 
chart plunge below the surrounding weeks. 


Upward Breakouts 

Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Intermediate-term Intermediate-term 

bullish reversal bullish reversal 

Performance rank 3 (last) out of 3 2 (last) out of 2 
Breakeven failure rate 8% 8% 
Average rise 54% 33% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Percentage meeting price target 77% 60% 
See also Horn bottoms 


After researching the performance of horn tops and bottoms, the natural thing 
to consider is removing the intervening week and testing the pattern again. 
That idea led me to discover pipes. 

I conducted an in-depth study of pipe bottoms on daily price charts and 
was disappointed. The statistics showed that daily pipes had a failure rate of 
18% with an average gain of 33%. Almost half of the patterns (45%) had gains 
less than 20%. However, there were a number of large winners: Almost a quar- 
ter of the daily pipes (23%) had gains over 50%. 


743 


744 Pipe Bottoms 


I saw potential. 

I began to believe that an investor trading daily pipes would either pick 
a pattern that failed or one that had such a small gain as to be unprofitable. 
I discarded the research and looked at the weekly chart. 

Pipe bottoms on the weekly scale have a low failure rate and a high aver- 
age rise. Even so, performance ranks last out of three pattern types on the 
weekly scale. Because this pattern uses the weekly scale, the search for the ulti- 
mate high overlooks situations that would stop the search and reduce the aver- 
age rise when applied to the daily scale. Thus, the numbers are not comparable 
to chart patterns on the daily scale. 


Tour 


Figure 49.1 shows a pipe bottom and the price appreciation that results. The 
chart is on the weekly scale, and you can see that price began dropping in mid- 
October 1993, down to the start of the pipe. Volume picked up during the left 
pipe spike and was even higher the following week. The two downward price 
spikes, of almost equal length and overlapping, mark a turning point, a signal 
that the decline was over. 

From the low, price moved up smartly and reached a new high in early 
November, a climb of almost 120% in just 9 months. For this chart pattern, 
such large gains are not unusual. Almost 35% of pipes in bull markets have 
gains over 50%. 


Ann Taylor (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, ANN) 


Figure 49.1 A pipe bottom on the weekly chart. Pipes commonly form after a 
retrace in an uptrend or at the bottom of a prolonged downtrend. 


Identification Guidelines 745 


Identification Guidelines 


How do you correctly identify pipe bottoms? Table 49.1 outlines the identi- 
fication guidelines. Although there are a number of them to consider, they are 
really quite obvious. Look at the pipe shown in Figure 49.2. 

Appearance. The pipe bottom looks like a railroad spur sticking below 
the surrounding price track. Look for two adjacent price spikes, which are 
obvious because they drop far below the surrounding weeks (Figure 49.1 
shows a better example of how obvious a pipe bottom should look). 

Weekly chart. Use weekly charts to find pipes. Although pipes appear on 
daily charts, they do not perform as well as pipes on weekly charts, probably 
due to how I measure performance. 

Two downward adjacent spikes. Two adjacent downward price spikes 
compose the pipe bottom, and it looks like two parallel lines on the chart. 

Perhaps the most critical feature of a pipe bottom is what happens in the 
third week. While you can easily spot two adjacent downward price spikes, toss 
the pipe aside if price does not rise the third week. The third week, the week 
following the second pipe spike, should leave a well-defined dual spike visible 
on the price chart. The 4-week pair (which includes the weeks before and after 
the pipe) is V shaped and is even clearer when combined with a downward 
price trend. 


Table 49.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Look for price to form a twin spike bottom, one that drops well 


below the surrounding weeks. 


Weekly chart Pipe bottoms on the daily price chart exist, but pipes on the weekly 
charts perform better. Use the weekly chart. 


Two downward Locate two downward price spikes that are next to each other. 
adjacent spikes 


Large spikes The price spikes should be unusually tall in the pipe, taller than most 
downward spikes during the year. The pipe should stand alone as 
the prior week and the following week have low prices that are 
near the pipe highs. 


Large overlap The 2 weeks composing the pipe should have a large price overlap 
between them. 


Volume Not a prerequisite, but most pipes show above-average volume on 
at least one or both spikes. 


Obvious pipe The pipe should be obvious on the chart, otherwise look elsewhere. 
The best performing pipes appear at the end of downtrends. 


Breakout direction, Price must close above the top of the tallest spike to break out. 
confirmation The pattern confirms as a valid pipe bottom when it breaks out 
upward. If price closes below the lower of the two spikes first, then 
it’s not a pipe bottom. 


746 Pipe Bottoms 


Conseco Inc (Insurance (Life), NYSE, CNC) 


Figure 49.2 A pipe bottom on the weekly chart. Point A is another pipe bottom 
with less spectacular results. 


Large spikes. The pipe spikes should appear as a large price drop and 
tall price range for 2 weeks in a row. The week before and after the pipe should 
have low prices near the top of the pipe. This characteristic makes the pipe 
stand out on the price chart as an easily recognizable pattern. 

Think of a hilltop covered with trees. You’re looking for two pines, next 
to each other, which tower well above the others. Flip the image of the hilltop 
upside-down, and that’s what pipes should look like. 

For example, the pipe shown in Figure 49.2 has a prior week low of 
11.63, somewhat near the left pipe high of 12.56 (certainly well above the low 
of 10.31). The right side does even better. It sports a low of 12.25, near the 
right pipe high of 12.50. 

Each spike decline (two in the pipe) should be unusual. The length should 
be well above the average downward spike length over the past year. It must 
appear as a large decline on the price chart, not just another 2-week blip in a 
sea of long downward price spikes. 

Large overlap. The pipe has a large price overlap. This is clear in the fig- 
ure because the left side of the pipe is just slightly taller than the right side. As 
a selection guideline, what you do not want to see is a large left side and a short 
right side. However, uneven spike bottoms is a good thing (see Table 49.11), 
so take your pick. 

Volume. Volume for each pipe spike is usually above average but need 
not be. Do not exclude a pipe simply because it does not obey the typical vol- 
ume characteristics. 


Focus on Failures 747 


Obvious pipe. The pipe must be unusual enough to catch your eye. Typ- 
ically, pipes form at the end of a decline and mark the turning point, such as 
that shown in Figures 49.1 and 49.2. 

If you look closely at Figure 49.2, you should be able to see another pipe. 
I have made it easy for you by marking it as point A. The pipe is not quite as 
well defined as the other pipe, and the price appreciation is certainly not as 
spectacular. Price rises from the right pipe low of 15.38 to a high of 18.13 
before price resumes its downward trend. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. The twin bottom pattern confirms 
as a pipe bottom only when price closes above the highest high in the pattern. 
Do not invest in a pipe without confirmation. 


Focus on Failures 


Pipe bottoms have only one type of failure: the 5% failure. A 5% failure hap- 
pens when price does not move higher by more than 5% before reversing 
trend. Figure 49.3 shows two such failures. 

The two pipes in April and May 1993 show good definition. They look 
like pipes, but they do not act like pipes. After the pipes complete, price should 
move up smartly, but it heads lower instead. 


Atlantic Richfield Co (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, ARC) 

| | -126 

| -124 

} -122 
-120 


in 
My i iy Ved thi ms 
a we 


| il ii 
| ff! Wy \ , E 


Pipe 


91 D9I2ZFMAM J J} ASOND 93FMAM4J 4 A SON D94E M 


Figure 49.3 Pipe bottom failures (weekly chart). Clues to these two pipe failures 
are in the spike lengths and volume trend. The best performing pipes form when 
price is trending down. The two pattern failures are not pipes at all because price 
does not close above the highest high in each pattern. 


748 Pipe Bottoms 


Why? 

Volume on the left spike of both pipes is below the monthly average. 
However, the right side shows higher-than-average volume in both pipes. Still, 
the volume pattern is unconvincing, because it usually appears most brisk at 
pipe bottoms. 

As a contrast, look at the pipe on the far left of the chart. Both spikes 
show volume that is well above average. 

Another clue to the two pipe failures lies buried in the guidelines out- 
lined in Table 49.1. Price should drop unusually far during the 2 weeks, more 
than most downward spikes during the year. As you look at the chart, you can see 
several downward, 1-week spikes (December and February, for example) that 
nearly equal the length of the two pipes. The entire chart seems filled with 
ragged price spikes of varying lengths. For this reason, you should be skeptical 
of investing in these two pipes. 

The big indicator of pipe failure is because the pipes are not pipes at 
all. Price does not confirm either pipe (which happens when price closes 
above the highest high in the pattern). Thus, an astute trader would not trade 
these patterns. 

Incidentally, before we leave Figure 49.3, it is a good time to illustrate 
a somewhat common feature of pipes. Since pipes often appear at the end of 
a downward price trend, price sometimes rises, loops around, and retests the 
low. The pipe in early December 1991 is an example. Price bounces up, rounds 
over, and falls back on itself, forming a new low at 98.13. The retest of the 
original low completes in late March. 

Pipe bottoms exhibit support at their lows. Rarely does price drop more 
than a half point or so below the pipe low before recovering and beginning 
an extended upward trend. The half point is not an absolute rule because it 
depends on the price of the stock (the one shown in the chart is a $100 stock, 
and it drops $1 below the prior low). 

So even though you may buy into a stock above the top of the pipe and 
watch price fall, hold on. Use common sense, though. Sometimes you can lose 
a lot of money by holding on too long. 


Statistics 


Table 49.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found a whopping 11,572 pipes in 1,279 stocks with 
the first one in July 1991 and the most recent in October 2018. Not all stocks 
covered the entire period, and some stocks no longer trade. I think I got fed up 
with searching for these things. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Pipe bottoms are, by defi- 
nition, reversals of the downward price trend because price breaks out upward 
after the pattern. If price doesn’t breakout upward, then it’s not a pipe. 


Table 49.2 
General Statistics 


Statistics 


749 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 8,826 2,746 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average rise 54% 33% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% 2% 

Days to ultimate high 176 98 

How many change trend? 63% 52% 


Average rise. The average rise in bull markets is a huge 54%! In bear 
markets, pipes perform less well, rising an average of 33%. Trade this pattern 
in bull markets for the best results. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In both bull and bear markets, the index 
climbed. A rise in bear markets can occur because the results depend on what 
happens to the index from the date of the pipe breakout to the ultimate high. 
You might say that the general market helped the individual stocks perform, as 
in a rising tide lifts all boats. That’s a cliché, but it fits the situation. 

Days to ultimate high. It takes a long time (6 months in bull markets) 
to climb 54%, which is nearly the same speed as the bear market needs to rise 
33% in 98 days. 

How many change trend? Patterns on the weekly scale seem to outper- 
form on this measure. This item is a count of how many pipes see price rise 
by more than 20% after the breakout. I consider values above 50% for bullish 
patterns to be a good number. This pattern passes. 

Table 49.3 shows failure rates for pipes. 


Table 49.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 


5 (breakeven) 
10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

50 

75 

Over 75 


684 or 8% 
968 or 19% 
851 or 28% 
749 or 37% 
564 or 43% 
556 or 50% 
465 or 55% 
1,032 or 66% 
1,109 or 79% 


1,848 or 100% 


212 or 8% 
431 or 23% 
344 or 36% 
318 or 48% 
283 or 58% 
218 or 66% 
162 or 72% 
328 or 84% 
224 or 92% 
226 or 100% 


750 Pipe Bottoms 


How do you read the table? Let me share a few examples. In bull mar- 
kets, 8% of pipes will fail to rise more than 5% after the breakout. The failure 
rate doubles in the next row and is triple the breakeven rate at 15%. In other 
words, 28% of patterns will fail to see price rise more than 15%. Bear markets 
are even worse, as one would expect, for a bullish pattern fighting against a 
bearish tide. 

Use the table to estimate how likely it will be to meet your cost of doing 
business and any profit margin you want to maintain. For example, say your 
cost is 5% and you want to make 15% on each trade, for a 20% total. 

How many patterns fail to rise more than 20%? In bull markets, 37% will 
fail and in bear markets, the results are worse, with 48% not exceeding a 20% 
threshold. 

Table 49.4 shows an abbreviated breakout-related statistics table. I don’t 
show throwbacks because they must happen in less than a month (four price 
bars on the weekly scale, making them scarce), nor gaps, which are rare on the 
weekly scale. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout is upward from a pipe 
bottom. If price closes below the bottom of the pattern before closing above 
the top of it, then you don’t have a valid pipe bottom. 

Yearly position, performance. Where in the yearly price range do the 
best performing pipes occur? Pipes with breakouts within a third of the yearly 
low perform best. You’ll want to avoid the other two ranges. This pattern seems 
made for bottom fishers, people who like to buy low and sell high (as opposed 
to momentum traders who buy high and sell higher). 

Table 49.5 shows size statistics for the pipe pattern. Tall patterns per- 
form better than short ones, continuing a trend shown by many other chart 
pattern types. In bull markets, for example, tall patterns see rises that average 
61%, which is well above the 48% gain posted by short patterns. 

‘To determine what is short or tall, compute the height of the pipe pat- 
tern from the higher of the two pipe spikes to the lower of the two. Divide the 
height by the price of the higher of the two spikes (the breakout price). If the 
result is bigger than the median shown in the table, then you have a tall pipe. 

Table 49.6 shows volume statistics for pipes. 

Volume trend. The volume trend is near random, but tilts toward down- 
ward. That means the left spike will show higher volume than the right one. 
Does it matter if it does or doesn’t? Let’s find out. 


Table 49.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 100% up 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the L 62%, M 49%, L 37%, M 33%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H 53% H 29% 


Statistics 751 


Rising/Falling volume. If the left spike in the pipe shows higher volume 
than the right one (so volume falls), performance improves in bull markets. 
Bear markets don’t seem to care much, but favor a rising volume trend. 

Breakout volume. Pipes with breakout volume above the 1-month aver- 
age tend to outperform, and quite substantially, too. Bear markets show the 
same trend, but performance is nearly the same. 

Table 49.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. A stop placed 
at the top of the pattern will trigger in two out of three trades (or more). 
I measured this by seeing how far price dropped on the way to the ultimate high. 
After price reached the ultimate high, I stopped the search and that accounts 
for why the hit rate isn’t higher (which is to say, I expected the values to be 
higher than that shown). 

The numbers suggest that placing a stop below the bottom of the pipe 
will keep a trade safe most of the time, but check to see if the stop is too far 
away from the buy price. Should the stop trigger, you don’t want to lose too 
much and suffer an asthma attack. 


Table 49.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 61% 36% 
Short pattern performance 48% 30% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 12.2% 15.3% 

Table 49.6 

Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 55% down 54% down 
Rising volume trend performance 53% 34% 
Falling volume trend performance 56% 33% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 57% 34% 
Light breakout volume performance 52% 33% 

Table 49.7 


How Often Stops Hit 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 66% 71% 

Middle 26% 25% 

Pattern bottom 7% 6% 


752 Pipe Bottoms 


Table 49.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 53% 
2000s 60% 
2010s 46% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 8% 
2000s 6% 
2010s 10% 


Table 49.8 shows the performance of pipe bottoms over three decades. 
I only show bull markets because bear markets happened only in the 2000s. 
They are not included in the statistics. 

Performance over time. The 2010s showed the worst performance of 
the three decades. I wonder if the popularity of the pattern is a cause for the 
performance decline. I introduced pipes to the world in the first edition of 
this book (2000), and performance has dropped since. I’ve heard that once the 
market learns of a winning setup, it stops working. I don’t know if that’s true, 
but it makes me wonder. 

Failures over time. Failures mirror performance. The 2000s had the 
best performance and also have the fewest failures. The 2010s had the worst 
performance and the most failures. 

You might guess that there’s a relationship between performance and fail- 
ures, and I thought there was until I started seeing weird results (such as high 
performance with lots of failures or low performance with few failures, that 
kind of thing). 

Table 49.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. In bull markets, over a thousand patterns bust. 
That sounds huge, but it’s only 16% of the pipes I tested. 


Table 49.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 1,398 or 16% 505 or 18% 
Single bust count 785 or 56% 386 or 76% 
Double bust count 429 or 31% 64 or 13% 
Triple+ bust count 184 or 13% 55 or 11% 
Performance for all busted patterns -22% -25% 
Single busted performance -24% -27% 


Non-busted performance (pipe tops) -19% -24% 


Trading Tactics 753 


Busted occurrence. Of those pipes that bust, most single bust followed 
by double and triple+ busts (more than two busts), in that order. That may 
sound like it’s the proper sequence, but I’ve seen triple+ busts come in second 
place in a number of other chart patterns. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used pipe tops as the proxy for 
pipe bottoms with downward breakouts. Busted pipes outperform pipe tops in 
both bull and bear markets. I’m not a fan of shorting a stock, but if you see a 
pipe bottom that busts, consider shorting it. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 49.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule is a guide (not a rule, really) 
that traders use to set a price target. To use it, compute the height of the pipe 
from the higher of the two spikes in the pattern to the lower of the two spikes. 
Add the height to the taller of the two spikes to get a target price. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches the target 
based on various heights used in the computation. If you use the full height, 


Table 49.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Subtract the highest high from the lowest low in the pipe (to get the 
pattern’s height) and add it to the highest high. The result is the 
target price. The bottom portion of the table shows the success rate 
of the measure rule using various heights. 


Downward trend Many of the best performing pipes show a downward price trend 
leading to the pipe. Pipes often occur at the bottom of a retrace 
in an upward price trend or mark the end of an extended 
price decline. 


Wait for Wait for price to close above the highest high in the pattern. 
confirmation 


Buy After a pipe bottom passes the identification characteristics shown in 
Table 49.1 (including confirmation), buy the stock. 


Stop location Pipes form a support zone, but price sometimes dips up to a half point 
below the pipe low (weeks or longer after confirmation), so use that 
as your stop-loss point. Raise your stop as price climbs. 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 90% 84% 
Percentage reaching full height target 77% 60% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 56% 33% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 43% 20% 


754 Pipe Bottoms 


price will reach the target 60% or more on average. Cut the height in half, add 
it to the breakout price, and the success rate climbs to 84% or higher. 

Once you know the target, convert the move into a percentage of the 
current price and compare it to Table 49.3. For example, if price is expected 
to climb by $5 in a stock current trading at $50, that’s a 10% move. Table 49.3 
says (you have to listen closely) that 19% of pipes will fail to see price rise more 
than 10% in bull markets. That’s reasonable. It means you have an 81% chance 
of making a decent profit if you trade it properly. 

Downward trend. A downward price trend is usually where you will see 
pipe bottoms, at least the best performing ones. Price moves down, reaches the 
pipe bottom, then turns around and starts climbing. Figures 49.1 and 49.2 are 
good examples of this behavior. 

Wait for confirmation. The pipe confirms as a valid pattern when price 
closes above the taller of the two peaks in the pipe, which usually takes 2 to 3 
weeks to occur. That interval gives enough time for the pattern to show good 
visibility on the right side of the pipe, meaning that it should look like a well- 
defined pipe with price rising after the pattern ends. 

Even if you miss the breakout, consider trading this pattern. You have 
an average of 3 to 6 months (from Table 49.2) before price peaks, and with 
gains averaging 54% in bull markets you should still have plenty of profit 
opportunity. 

Buy. Once you have identified a confirmed pipe bottom on the weekly 
scale, buy the stock. Since a stock will often retest the most recent low before 
starting on a sustained journey upward, be prepared for it. 

Stop location. Place a stop-loss order half a point (to allow room for the 
retest to drift below the pipe low) below the lowest pipe (but use your best 
judgment, depending on the price of the stock, of course). If the stock hits the 
stop, then price is probably going to continue down. In such a case, close out 
your position and send a letter home to Mom asking for more money. 

Table 49.11 shows one feature of pipes with a performance difference 
worth noting. 

I measured the price difference between the bottoms of the two spikes in 
the pipe and divided by the breakout price. The median difference was small, 
as one would expect (1% or 2%). 

If the difference was greater than the median, the pipe tended to outper- 
form in both bull and bear markets, which is reassuring. 


Table 49.11 
Special Features 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Median pipe difference as percentage of breakout price 1% 2% 
Difference > median, median performance 32% 22% 


Difference <= median, median performance 29% 20% 


Experience 755 


What does this mean? As you look at your pipe, if the bottom of the two 
spikes do not share the same price (or aren’t even close), then expect better 
performance. It might not happen, but that’s the way to bet. 

I checked other configurations of volume and spike length and so on, but 
this is the only idea showing promise. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


EMC 


EMC (EMC) showed a pipe bottom in 2004. I bought the week after the pipe 
confirmed and again after a throwback completed (switching to the daily scale, 
for the second trade). 

I scored the pipe and found it was +2 (for details, see my book, Tiading 
Classic Chart Patterns, Wiley, 2002), meaning the pattern had a good chance of 
meeting the target price for the stock (not the measure rule target). I didn’t 
log what the scoring system said for the target, but my target was 12 (with an 
entry price of 10.53). 

The stock climbed but stalled just short of the prior high as it encoun- 
tered overhead resistance. 

It was time to sell. 

General market weakness forced the stock down, and it hit my stop. It 
took me out of the trade at 13.53. I made 28% on the first trade and 23% on 
the second. The stock continued lower, to 11.10 in just over 3 months for a 
drop of 18% from my sale price. 

In this case, the entry was perfect. The exit was a bit late, but I sold near 
the top. I don’t see anything wrong with these two trades. 


Hercules Inc. 


In Hercules Inc. (HPC), the stock formed a pipe bottom in 2007 as part of 
a retrace in an upward price trend. According to my spreadsheet of trades, I 
made a perfect entry and perfect exit. I bought the stock the third week after 
the pipe ended. However, looking at the chart and reading my notes, I called 
it a potential pipe bottom because it hadn’t confirmed when I bought it. Fortu- 
nately, it confirmed later that week. 


¢ Lesson: It’s best to trade only confirmed chart patterns. 


I placed a volatility stop and continued to raise it as price climbed. 


756 Pipe Bottoms 


When the general market (Dow industrials) slid over 500 points over 
two days, the receding tide sucked me out of the trade (price hit my stop) for a 
small profit. Here’s what I wrote about the exit: “Lesson: If this is a short-term 
trade with a price target, set a limit order to sell at the target or maybe sell half 
at the target and ride the rest higher.” 

Had I done that, I’d have made a bit more. I like the idea of selling a por- 
tion of the position at the target and holding the rest for additional gains. 


¢ Lesson: For short-term swing trades, set a limit order to sell at the 
target price. 

¢ Lesson: For short-term swing trades, consider selling a portion (like 
half) of the position at the target and holding onto the rest to see if 
price continues to trend in your favor. 


Hi-tech Pharmacal 


Hi-tech Pharmacal (HITK) in 2007 was like I was asking to be taken to the 
woodshed and beaten to a pulp. My notes on the analysis of the company and 
the setup were filled with warnings. The company settled a patent lawsuit by 
paying $2.5 million (I don’t like to find litigation notes in company reports), 
and one brokerage firm called it a strong sell. Another had me pen this com- 


ment: “The worst star scores I’ve ever seen.” Plus, it was thinly traded, which 
I don’t like. 


¢ Lesson: If the shares you wish to trade make up more than 1% of aver- 
age daily volume, then the stock is too thinly traded. Look elsewhere. 


There were positive indications about a winning trade, too. The stock 
was sitting on a shelf of support. The commodity channel index (CCI, an indi- 
cator) said buy the prior day. The chart pattern had a +2 score with a target of 
15.42, above the buy price of 12.30. 

My uneasiness about the stock made me cut the position size in half. 


¢ Lesson: Worried about a trade? Cut the position size. 


I did not wait for confirmation of the pipe bottom (it didn’t appear to 
confirm on either the daily or weekly scales). Instead, I bought the day after 
price made a strong move up on the daily scale. 

I placed an order to sell on the close if my conditional stop order hit. 
And it hit the day after I bought, handing me a 6% loss for a holding time 
of one day. 

I consider myself fortunate that I took such a small loss. The stock con- 
tinued lower, but not in a straight line. The 2008 bear market took the stock 
down to 3.46 or 70% below where I sold. 


Sample Trade 757 


¢ Lesson: Wait for confirmation before buying. 
¢ Lesson: If the stock busts an upward breakout from a chart pattern, sell 
immediately (or certainly consider selling). 


Spansion 


I left the best trade for last. In 2008, I flirted with the semiconductor industry 
and bought Spansion (SPSN). It seems every time I buy a semiconductor stock 
or chip maker, I lose money. 

The pipe appeared, and it looked good. It showed on the weekly chart 
after the stock had gone down for a year, suggesting a turn in the stock was 
overdue. Fundamentals of the company said they had a book value of over 
$12 a share with the stock selling at $4. So it was a good value play (based on 
that one measure). The industry was weak (poor relative strength versus other 
industries). 

The pipe confirmed, and I bought into the stock. 

The stock eased lower, so I bought more to average down. Even with two 
buys, it was a small position for me. 

Eight months later, my notes are talking about bankruptcy, so I sold the 
position for a loss. 

What happened to the stop? It was right there, in my notes. Because the 
stock was inexpensive, volatility is often high, so I had a stop set for a potential 
loss of 18%. That’s significantly higher than the 8% or less I like to use. And 
beside the stop figure appeared these fateful words: “Stop used: None.” That 
means I never placed the stop. 

How big was the loss? Answer: 72%. Wow. That’s heart-stopping. But on 
a dollar basis, it was very small because I kept the position size down. 


¢ Lesson: If the loss reaches 10%, then consider selling (reevaluate the 
situation and the reasons for buying). A drop of 20% or more means 
the stock is in its own bear market and it’s going down. It should be an 
automatic sell. 

¢ Lesson: Not placing a stop-loss order because the size of the loss is too 
big means the trade should be abandoned anyway. 


Sample Trade 


One way to learn how to trade pipe bottoms is to review what Peter did. Peter 
is one of the more intelligent software engineers I know. Not only is he smart, 
but he is personable as well. He is very helpful and friendly unless management 
turns the screws and demands that work actually be done on time. Then the 
pressure seeps in and tempers flare. When the pressure gets too intense and 


758 Pipe Bottoms 


Peter feels the need to take a break, he does not take a walk as most other peo- 
ple might do. Instead, he invests in the stock market. Since he has an Internet 
connection in his office, he is online in just seconds. 

The situation shown in Figure 49.4 intrigued him. Price had been mov- 
ing horizontally since April 1992 (a portion of that isn’t shown, so use your 
imagination), forming an extended base on which an upward breakout of sig- 
nificant proportions would evolve, he hoped. 

Over the shorter term, price began trending down in mid-January 1994. 
It reached a low the week of 4 April, accompanied by above-average volume. 
Had this downward price spike been alone, it might have signaled a one-day 
reversal (one-week reversal really, since we are on the weekly scale). However, 
another downward spike appeared the following week. Price did not drop to 
the low of the prior week (38.38) but came close at 38.63. 

The dual spikes were long enough to set them apart from the surround- 
ing price action, certainly longer than the brief, 1-week dip in mid-March. The 
following week price moved up smartly, leaving a clear pipe bottom visible on 
the chart. When price confirmed the pipe, Peter bought the stock and received 
a fill at 42. 

“T set a stop at 37.88, or 12 cents below a whole number, and you know 
why, right?” 

He placed the stop there because whole numbers sometimes act as sup- 
port (or resistance). Placing the stop just below 38 would give the stock every 
opportunity to turn around and move higher. 


BankAmerica Corp (Bank, NYSE, BAC) 


jy ltt pry! 


| if! 
my Dl Ha {i hy 


tu 42 


Pipe Low Retest 


93 ND94 FMA M] JAS OND95FMAMJ J A SO NDI6FMAM J 


Figure 49.4 Pipe bottom with preceding brief price dip and following low retest 
(weekly chart). As described in the Sample Trade, Peter bought this stock the week 
after the pipe completed and sold it for a 71% gain 2 years later. 


Sample Trade 759 


As Peter watched the stock, he was pleased that it was working out so 
well. “The real test would be when the stock approached the top of its trad- 
ing range.” 

Over the prior 2 years, it had reached a high of 55.50 and a low of 40.50. 
If you exclude 3 months when price shot higher and then fell back down, the 
range was tighter, with a high about 49. “The keys were 49 and 55.50. If price 
pierced those levels, then the stock would probably continue moving up. Or so 
I hoped. I watched the stock, and when it hit 50.25 and fell back, I knew this 
run was not the one that would send the stock higher.” 

Price crumbled again. “I crossed my fingers and hoped that it was only a 
retest of the low and not the start of a new downtrend.” 

During late November, price reached a low of 38.63, tying one of the 
pipe lows. Then price moved modestly higher. “That’s when I doubled my 
position. Averaging down.” 

In early February 1995, price broke out of its congestion zone and zoomed 
higher. From that point on, there was no looking back. 

Price continued rising in an almost straight-line bead until April 1996. 
Then, after setting a new high (80.38), price backtracked. Expecting a retrace 
in an uptrend, Peter held onto his shares. “I watched the shares sink, and when 
they reached 72, I threw up my hands and sold. And you know what happened 
next? The sucker dipped to 69.95 before rising again. Turns out I sold the 
blasted thing too soon.” 

Still, he made $30 a share or 71% in about 2 years. 


50 


Pipe Tops 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Two adjacent and unusually long upward price spikes on the weekly chart 
rise above the surrounding weeks. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term bear- Short-term bear- 
ish reversal ish reversal 
Performance rank 1 (best) out of 2 2 (last) out of 2 
Breakeven failure rate 13% 5% 
Average decline 19% 24% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Percentage meeting 54% 55% 
price target 

See also Horn tops 


From the statistics given in the Results Snapshot, pipe tops perform better in 
bear markets with a large average decline and tiny failure rate. That finding 
makes sense because pipes are bearish chart patterns usually found near the 
end of an uptrend or in the midst of a downtrend. 

The pattern ranks first or second, which is terrific if we’re competing 
against dozens of other chart pattern types. However, pipes use the weekly 
charts and the only other bearish chart pattern on that scale is a horn top. 
The first-place finish in bull markets is actually a tie with horns, too. 

Let’s take a tour to see what this pattern looks like. 


760 


Identification Guidelines 761 


Tour 


Figure 50.1 (weekly scale) shows what pipes look like and how they perform. 
There are three pipes shown in the figure, all of them tops, all warning of an 
impending trend change. The pipe on the left occurs while price is still rising 
and acts as part of the consolidation of the trend. However, the pipe is not a 
pipe at all because the pattern does not confirm—price does not close below 
the pattern’s low before closing above the pattern’s high. 

The center pipe pattern really marks the turning point for the stock. It 
towers above the surrounding hillside, and price on either side of it falls away. 
The resulting pattern looks like an upside-down V. 

The pipe on the right is the last one before price really begins tumbling. 
It flags the last chance to exit an existing position or place a short at a good 
price. From the high at 39.25, price tumbles to below 13 by the end of this 
chart—a 67% drop. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 50.1 outlines the guidelines for correctly identifying pipe tops, and 
Figure 50.2 shows an example. 


Advanced Micro Devices, Inc (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD) 


Unconfirmed Pipe ~40 


mE a — 38 


fh Ih Hu a 
rh wih ! ly i 
J ih 


‘ny 
| petty -20 
We agua, 


Figure 50.1 The pipe on the left is not a pipe at all because price does not close 
below the formation low before rising above the top. Note: Weekly scale. 


762 Pipe Tops 


Table 50.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Look for price to form a twin spike peak, one that towers well above 


the surrounding weeks. 


Weekly chart Pipe tops on the daily price chart exist, but pipes on the weekly 
charts perform better. Use the weekly scale. 


Two upward adja- Locate two adjacent and upward price spikes. The spikes should be 
cent spikes unusually tall, taller than most upward spikes during the year. The 
pipe should stand alone as the prior week and the following week 
have high prices that are near the pipe bottoms. 


Volume Not a prerequisite, but most pipes (86%) show above-average vol- 
ume on at least one or both spikes. 


Breakout direction, Breakout is downward, by definition, when price closes below the 
confirmation lower of the two pipe spikes. When price breaks out downward, it 
confirms the pattern as a valid pipe top. 


Appearance. Pipes are easy to spot on the weekly charts, and they are 
plentiful. Look for two adjacent upward price spikes like that shown in the 
figure. 

Weekly chart. Pipes appear on any timeframe, but they perform better 
on the weekly charts. I suggest you confine your searches to those. 

Two upward adjacent spikes. The two spikes in a pipe should be con- 
secutive weeks, looking like railroad tracks, a set of parallel price bars. Look for 
unusually tall price spikes, ones that are taller than many other spikes during 
the prior year. You want the pipe to stand out. 

Volume. We’ll see in the Statistics section that volume trends downward. 
That means the left spike will often have higher volume than the right. Volume 
will be above the 1-month average on at least one of the spikes 86% of the time. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. Pipes break out downward when 
price closes below the bottom of the pattern (below the lowest pipe spike). If 
the breakout is upward, then you don’t have a valid pipe top. 

Always wait for price to confirm the pattern, that is, to break out down- 
ward. Never trade an unconfirmed pipe. 

If you look at enough pipe tops, you will discover that many form as part 
of an upward retrace during a downward trend such as that shown in the figure. 

The twin highs of the pipe are just 13 cents apart and are well above the 
surrounding weeks. Except for the spike in mid-March, the price spikes are 
unusually tall when compared with other spikes throughout the prior year. 
Since the pipe spikes both share the same low price, the two spikes exhibit a 
large price overlap, but the amount of overlap isn’t critical. 

The pipe signals a resumption of the downtrend. In less than 2 months, 
price drops to a low of 18 before recovering slightly. 


Focus on Failures 763 


Airborne Freight (Air Transport, NYSE, ABF) 


atthe at! ” 
ay i ty I | 


Il, “39 


"ttt | 
tl “34 


94 FF M A’ M J JAS OF ND 95 FM AM 


Figure 50.2 This pipe top (weekly scale) appears during a retrace in a long-term 
downtrend, as do some of the best performing pipes. 


Focus on Failures 


Failures occur when price declines by no more than 5% before resuming its 
upward trend. Five percent failures do not happen too often in pipe tops, but 
their occurrence is significant enough to warrant a review of the situation. 

Many failures happen when price is trending up. The uptrend ranges 
from several months to over a year, and the pipes seem to signal a coming 
trend change. Sometimes they do and price drops, but by no more than 5%. At 
other times, the drop is more severe, but it may happen in 2 to 5 months in the 
future. In between the pipe and the drop there are higher prices. 

Sprinkled among the uptrend failures are those related to downtrends. 
A pipe failure in a downtrend usually appears near the end of a long down- 
trend or shortly after the downtrend ends and price begins recovering. Instead 
of an upward retrace in a downtrend, the pipe marks the turning point for 
higher prices. 

Consider Figure 50.3, a pipe top in a stock that has been moving side- 
ways for about a year. Upward breakouts from these long, flat consolidation 
areas typically mark the beginning of a long rise, as in this case. For many chart 
patterns, there is one overriding rule: There must be something to reverse. 

You can see that the consolidation region narrows over time, reminiscent 
of a long, symmetrical triangle. Even the volume pattern supports the triangle 
by receding most of the way. Since the boundaries of a symmetrical triangle 


764 Pipe Tops 
Alex Brown Inc (Securities Brokerage, NYSE, AB) 


- 56 


ts S 


1 
nyt 
Pipe ful hill ~ 36 
Symmetrical Triangle | - 32 
( rs ul - 30 


| Lyaytt! ha - 28 

WH Th Tee a | PP Z 
Hayes yw iby es “34 
=22 


that 
wl 


93 S O ND 94 FMAM J J A S OND 95 FM AMYJ J AS 


Figure 50.3 This pipe top forms near the end of a long symmetrical triangle on 
the weekly chart. An investor should wait for a downward breakout before trading 
any pipe top. The pipe never confirmed as a valid pattern. 


mark lines of support and resistance, the possible decline from the pipe base to 
the triangle boundary is just 5%, not a very compelling investment. In essence, 
there just is not much of a climb to reverse. 

However, in all fairness, if the pipe correctly predicted a downward 
breakout from the triangle, I would be telling you a different story. Since it is 
difficult or impossible to predict the breakout direction from a symmetrical 
triangle, it is best to wait for the actual breakout. If investors had waited for 
price to close below the pipe, they could have saved themselves from a loss 
(because the pipe never confirmed as a valid pattern). The pipe shown in the 
figure is a failure of price to decline. Price reached a high of 60.75 in Septem- 
ber, more than double the price where the pipe formed. 


Statistics 


Table 50.2 lists general statistics for pipe tops. 

Number found. I dug up 5,412 pipe tops in 1,176 stocks with the first 
starting in July 1991 and the most recent in November 2018. Not all stocks 
covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. Pipes are plentiful (and 
all were on the weekly charts). 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. A pipe top acts as a reversal 
of the prevailing price trend when price enters the pattern from the bottom 
and leaves by a downward breakout. 


Table 50.2 
General Statistics 


Statistics 


765 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 4,001 1,411 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average decline -19% -24% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -2% -9% 

Days to ultimate low 53 39 

How many change trend? 38% 52% 


Average decline. It’s difficult to gauge how well a 19% drop is compared 
to other chart patterns because only horn tops and pipe tops appear on the 
weekly scale with downward breakouts. 

Let’s think about the decline from a different perspective. Is a 19% (bull 
market) or 24% (bear market) drop large enough for you to want to sell an 
existing holding? Of course, the results shown are averages and your pipe may 
result in a smaller (or larger) drop. Swing traders may drool at capturing such 
a decline, but buy-and-hold investors may yawn. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Tracking the performance of the S&P 
using the same hold time from breakout to ultimate low as the pipes shows that 
the market declined along the way. The market decline helped the individual 
stocks drop. 

Days to ultimate low. The average decline in bear markets is 24% and 
takes 39 days. In bull markets, the decline is 19% and takes 53 days. Thus, the 
bear market decline is faster than the bull market one. Doing the math, we find 
the bear market decline is 1.7 times faster than the bull market drop. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how many pipes see price 
drop more than 20%. Values for bullish (not pipe tops) patterns over 50% I 
consider terrific, but I don’t have a gauge for bearish patterns. Clearly the bear 
market number is wonderful, and the bull market rate isn’t bad, either. 

Table 50.3 shows failure rates for pipes (this sounds like something to do 
with plumbing). Notice that the failure rates in bear markets are lower than are 
those in bull markets. For a bearish pattern, that’s no surprise. 

Let me provide a few examples so you understand how to read the table. 
In bear markets, 5% of the pipes will fail to see price drop more than 5%. That 
rate more than triples in the next row when we see 19% fail to see price drop 
more than 10%. Almost half of the patterns (48%) won’t exceed a 20% drop. 

Notice how the failure rates climb for declines of 5%, 10%, and 15%. 
The rapid increase in failures for small price changes is typical for chart pat- 
terns. It emphasizes the risky nature of chart pattern trading and the difficulty 
of making large gains. 

Table 50.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 


766 Pipe Tops 


Table 50.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 522 or 13% 76 or 5% 
10 782 or 33% 194 or 19% 
15 659 or 49% 209 or 34% 
20 520 or 62% 197 or 48% 
25 433 or 73% 170 or 60% 
30 326 or 81% 151 or 71% 
35 250 or 87% 114 or 79% 
50 382 or 97% 188 or 92% 
75 123 or 100% 101 or 99% 
Over 75 4 or 100% 11 or 100% 

Table 50.4 

Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-20%, M-19%, L-26%, M -25%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H -18% H -21% 
Table 50.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -21% -26% 
Short pattern performance -16% -22% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 13.0% 16.8% 


Breakout direction. Pipes have downward breakouts, only. A pipe top 
with an upward breakout isn’t a pipe top. That reminds me of an old joke: A 
day without sunshine is like night. 

Yearly position, performance. The best performing pipes have their 
breakouts near the yearly low. You’ll want to avoid trading a pipe top near the 
yearly high, especially in bear markets. 

Table 50.5 shows statistics related to pipe height. Tall pipes perform bet- 
ter than short ones. To use this finding, measure your pipe from the highest 
high to the lowest low in the pattern and then divide by the breakout price (the 
lowest low). If the result is higher than the median shown in the table, you have 
a tall pipe. Otherwise, it is a short one. 


Statistics 767 


Table 50.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 58% down 59% down 
Rising volume trend performance -18% -23% 
Falling volume trend performance -19% -25% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -19% -24% 
Light breakout volume performance -18% -24% 

Table 50.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 5% 3% 
Middle 22% 16% 
Pattern bottom 69% 63% 


Because pipes have a defined 2-week width, I don’t show any width sta- 
tistics or performance associated with the combination of height and width. 

Table 50.6 shows volume statistics for pipes. 

Volume trend. Volume trends lower across the 2-week pattern, but it’s 
close to random. You don’t want to discard a pipe top just because volume 
trends upward. 

Rising/Falling volume, breakout volume. In both markets, the per- 
formance after rising or falling volume, heavy or light breakout day volume, 
is not significant enough to worry about. I think technical analysts place too 
much emphasis on volume. Some say that if breakout volume isn’t unusually 
robust (above average), then discard the pattern. I think that’s a mistake, but 
the choice is yours. 

Table 50.7 shows how often a stop placed at various locations in the pipe 
will trigger. For example, I found that if you place a stop-loss order at the top 
of the pipe, it’ll hit between 3% and 5% of the time (depending on the mar- 
ket). Move it to the bottom of the pattern and it'll hit much more frequently, 
as the table shows. 

When placing a stop, be sure to check the size of the potential loss. Con- 
vert the dollar loss into a percentage of the current price, and if you don’t 
become ill because the potential loss is huge, then maybe it’s worth using. 

Table 50.8 highlights the performance of pipes over the last 3 decades. 

Performance over time. The 1990s showed better performance than 
more recent decades. However, the returns have been quite stable. 


768 Pipe Tops 


Table 50.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -20% 
2000s -18% 
2010s -18% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 11% 
2000s 15% 
2010s 15% 
Table 50.9 
Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 1,077 or 27% 184 or 13% 
Single bust count 716 or 66% 107 or 58% 
Double bust count 59 or 5% 5 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 302 or 28% 72 or 39% 
Performance for all busted patterns 48% 28% 
Single busted performance 65% 37% 
Non-busted performance (pipe bottoms) 54% 33% 


Failures over time. Failures were lowest in the 1990s but not much 
higher over the next two decades. 

Table 50.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. More than one in four bull market pipes will 
bust. That means a stock showing a pipe will see price drop no more than 10% 
after the breakout before reversing and closing above the top of the pipe. 

Busted occurrence. Bull market pipes have a higher tendency to single 
bust than those in bear markets. I guess that makes sense because pipes are 
bearish. They should do better in bear markets. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared the performance of 
busted pipe tops with pipe bottoms (as a proxy for a pipe top with an upward 
breakout). 

Single busted pipes outperformed pipe bottoms in both bull and bear 
markets. The problem with trading a busted pipe is that you don’t know if it'll 
single bust or not. So look for overhead resistance that may interfere with a 
rising price trend. If it’s nearby, then ask if you think price will be able to push 
its way through. 


Trading Tactics 769 


Trading Tactics 


Table 50.10 shows trading tactics for pipe tops. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule for pipes to find a price 
target. Compute the formation height by subtracting the lowest low from the 
highest high in the pipe. Subtract the result from the breakout price (the low- 
est low) to get a target. 

How often does this work? The bottom portion of the table provides the 
answer. Using the full height, it works about half the time on average. If you 
cut the height of the pipe in half and use that in the formula, you’ll get a higher 
success rate: 80% or higher. 

Once you know your target, convert the move into a percentage of the 
current price by dividing the two and checking Table 50.3. For example, say 
the distance to the target is $5 in a stock with a breakout price of $50. That’s 
a 10% move. Table 50.3 says that in bull markets, 33% of pipe tops will fail to 
see price drop more than 10%. That means if you were to trade it perfectly and 
often enough, you’d make money 67% of the time. 

Downward trend. The performance of pipes depends on the prevail- 
ing price trend. For larger percentage moves, look for pipes that appear as an 
upward retrace near the start of a decline. Avoid trading those if the decline has 
been in existence for many months (like almost a year). 


Table 50.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the height of the pipe and subtract it from the breakout price. 
The bottom portion of the table shows the success rate of the meas- 
ure rule using various heights. 


Downward trend The best performing pipes occur near the start of downtrends. Price 
bounces up, forms a pipe, and then resumes its downward trend. 
Long-term If a pipe appears in an uptrend of a year or more, then the pipe might 
uptrends signal a trend reversal (from up to down). Be careful because pipes 
sometimes are premature by 2 to 5 months. 
Uptrend retrace Pipes often appear in uptrends. They mark short-term weakness where 
the trend reverses and moves down. These can be profitable short- 


term moves. 
Stop location See Table 50.7 for guidance. 
Tips See text. 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 80% 83% 
Percentage reaching full height target 54% 55% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 23% 25% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 10% 12% 


770 Pipe Tops 


Long-term uptrends. In long-term uptrends, the pipe might signal the 
end of an uptrend. Sometimes it is premature by a few months, so do not be in 
too much of a rush to sell the stock short. At other times, a review of the sur- 
rounding price patterns might be rewarding. Double or triple tops sometimes 
show pipes as part of their tops, calling the turn exactly. Figure 50.1 shows an 
example of this in a head-and-shoulders top. 

Uptrend retrace. For many uptrends, pipes represent periods of short- 
term weakness. Price will move down for a month or two (sometimes more) 
before resuming the uptrend. The decline might be 10% to 20% but seldom 
represents a significant percentage change. For swing traders, pipes can be 
profitable if you are careful, lucky, and aggressive. 

Stop location. Spend some time visiting Table 50.7 to get the prob- 
abilities of price reaching a stop placed at various locations in the pipe. Tell 
“em [om sent you. 

Tips. A knot is what I call a congestion region of at least 3 price bars long 
(weeks in this case). Price moves horizontally with lots of price overlap. Knots 
appear in strong trends where price pauses before resuming the trend. 

You want to look for those knots, especially the one closest to the bottom 
of the pipe on the weekly scale. That knot is your short-term price target. 

If the knot is near the bottom of the pipe, then don’t trade it. The pipe will 
likely bust (see price break out downward, hit the knot, and reverse to close 
above the pattern and continue higher). It’s a risky trade because it won’t give 
you much room to profit before the stock reverses. 

Not just knots will turn price upward, either. Prior peaks or valleys work, 
too. Look for those as you scan your chart where a pipe top occurs. 


¢ Review knots in Chapter 1 for additional tips on how to use them 
for trading. 


Table 50.11 shows one feature of pipes that’s worth mentioning. I com- 
puted the difference between the top of the two spikes and found the median, 
which was 1%. When the difference between the two peaks was more than the 
median, performance improved. In other words, you'll see a farther decline. 

As you search for pipes, look for two peaks that do not share the same 
price. Indeed, you might wish to look for patterns with a large price difference. 


Sample Trade 


Johnny is a civil servant working in a state office, and he handles the paperwork 
for companies just beginning life. Most are sole proprietorships that go bust 
in a year or two, but there are exceptions. Discussions with customers have 
helped him spot profitable trends in the stock market and have helped him 
avoid costly mistakes. 


Sample Trade 771 


Table 50.11 
Special Features 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Median pipe difference as percentage of breakout price 1% 1% 
Difference > median, median performance -17% -22% 
Difference <= median, median performance -14% -20% 


His interest turned to the steel industry when he learned that the federal 
government was thinking of punishing foreign producers for dumping steel 
in the United States. He learned about the trend from comments made about 
how price for steel products was dropping rapidly. Companies using the cheap 
steel thought the decline was great, but the steel companies did not agree. The 
bosses at the steel companies started jumping up and down on their favorite 
politicians. 

When Johnny saw the situation depicted in Figure 50.4, he formed a 
unique plan to profit from the pipe top. He measured the percentage gain 
from the base (point A in the figure) to point B, the first minor high on the 
weekly chart. The rise was 34%. Then he calculated the amount of the retrace 
from points B to C, which turned out to be 14%. 

As he watched the price climb from point C to the pipe, he whipped out 
his calculator and discovered that the percentage change was 50%, near the 
34% gain of the first push. He suspected and hoped that the pipe top marked 


Allegheny Ludlum Corp (Steel (General), NYSE, ALS) 


Shorted 


ut I" af “17 


Pe" ee 


Covered 


Figure 50.4 This pipe top appeared at the end of a rise—-retrace pattern that saw 
price climb by 35% and fall by 15%. Note: Weekly scale. 


772 Pipe Tops 


the start of a downward retrace that would take price lower, probably around 
15% lower, equaling the B to C retrace. 

“T sold short at 22.25 and put an order to cover if the stock declined by 
15% to 19.” On the other side, he placed a mental stop-loss order at 23.25, 
slightly above the right pipe high at 23.19. 

The stock moved horizontally for several weeks and then tumbled. When 
it reached 19, his short was covered and he made about $3 a share in 5 weeks. 
Meanwhile, the stock bottomed out at 18.75, just below his target and an 
amount similar in size to the earlier retrace. 

Lest you get too excited about this rise—-retrace type of trade, let me cau- 
tion you. Although I have used this maneuver profitably, many times things 
do not turn out quite so neatly. Be careful and make use of stop-loss orders, 
especially if you are shorting a stock. Search for support zones to help gauge 
the ultimate decline. 


ST 


Rectangle Bottoms 


ih 
Tl fh hl hl 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A stock trends down to a region where price moves sideways, oscillating 
up and down between two horizontal trendlines before breaking out. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish reversal 
Performance rank 8 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 15% 
Average rise 48% 
Volume trend Downward 
Throwbacks 64% 
Percentage meeting price target 79% 
See also Flags, measured move down, 


rectangle tops 


773 


774 Rectangle Bottoms 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish Short-term bearish 
continuation continuation 

Performance rank 14 out of 36 2 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 24% 6% 
Average drop 16% 26% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 66% 64% 
Percentage meeting 55% 69% 


price target 


Like other chart patterns without a classic definition of a top or bottom, 
I decided to give rectangles a definition by separating them based on the price 
trend approaching the rectangle. If the trend is downward, then the chart pat- 
tern is a bottom. If the trend is up, then the chart pattern classifies as a top. 

This chapter concerns itself with rectangle bottoms. Bottoms have two 
breakout directions: up and down (no surprise, right?). The Results Snapshot 
lists the more important statistics. You’ll notice that statistics for upward break- 
outs in bear markets are missing. That’s because I didn’t find enough samples 
to qualify for a solid statistical presentation. 

As performers, rectangle bottoms do well, especially in bear markets after 
downward breakouts. There, they rank second where a rank of 1 is best for 
performance. And that’s out of 19 types of chart patterns. 

Failure rates of 6% are also low, ranking third out of 19 (not shown) 
where a rank of 1 has the lowest failure rate. That bear market failure rate is 
one-fourth of the 24% failure rate in bull markets (downward breakouts). Of 
course, that’s expected. When price tries to drop in a rising market, you would 
expect a high failure rate. Bull markets with upward breakouts show a more 
respectable 15% failure rate (well above 6% but below 24%). 

Let’s take a tour of this pattern to see what it looks like. 


Tour 


Figure 51.1 shows an example of a rectangle bottom. An upward price trend 
lasted just 3 days leading to the rectangle, but it was too short both in duration 
and height to be important. The more significant trend is downward, and I 
consider the decline a few days before the rectangle as undershoot. Under- 
shoot commonly happens just before price oscillates between support and 
resistance zones. 


Identification Guidelines 775 


Kellogg Co (Food Processing, NYSE, K) 


Triangle - 60 


Ly, ; ial . 59 
“hy | Hl | Ht yf | -58 


| iM igh “ss 


Pre-Formation ~53 
Drop -52 


Nov 94 Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 51.1 A rectangle bottom shows an intermediate-term downtrend lead- 
ing to the pattern with an upward breakout. After the breakout, price created a 
descending triangle and burst upward out of that chart pattern, too. 


The rectangle bottom formed after price dropped out of a slightly 
rounded top that began in October 1994 (not shown) and lasted to January 
1995. Price dropped quickly from 57 to 52.50, recovered, and bumped up 
against overhead resistance at 56. 

For more than a month, the stock bounced between the two zones (54 
and 56) like a ping-pong ball ricocheting off players’ paddles. Up and down, 
up and down price boomeranged on rising volume. After one player sneezed, 
the price ball shot past him. Price moved up, pausing only a day before mov- 
ing higher on heavy volume. The stock climbed quickly after that and entered 
another congestion zone; this time it was a descending triangle with an 
upward breakout. 

This chart shows what a rectangle bottom should look like if you ignore 
the undershoot. It’s a tight congestion region of horizontal price movement, 
with the stock touching each trendline multiple times. Very nice, indeed. 


Identification Guidelines 
Table 51.1 shows identification guidelines for rectangle bottoms. While 


reviewing the guidelines, consider how they apply to the rectangle shown in 
Figure 51.2. 


776 Rectangle Bottoms 


Table 51.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price bounces between a region of underlying support and overhead 
resistance for several weeks, crossing the pattern from top to bottom 
before breaking out either upward or downward. 


Price trend The prevailing price trend leading to the rectangle is down by 
definition. 
Horizontal Two horizontal, or nearly so, trendlines bound price along the top and 
trendlines bottom of the rectangle. 
Touches There should be at least five touches total (three of one trendline and 


two of another). Price should cross the rectangle plenty of times to 
fill the whitespace. 


Volume Volume usually trends downward. 

Breakout Either up or down. A close outside of the trendline border signals 
direction the breakout. 

Duration If the rectangle is shorter than 3 weeks, make sure it’s not a flag (a 


rectangle will not have a flagpole). 


Titan Corp (Financial Services, NYSE, TTN) 


| 
| i" 
| 
a hl 


i: | 
wt i a, bye 
pe "yu 


Oct 95 Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 51.2 A rectangle bottom appears in a downtrend. Price falls out the bot- 
tom and then retraces to the rectangle top before moving lower. 


Appearance. Price travels horizontally for several weeks, bounc- 
ing between underlying support and overhead resistance, forming a rectan- 
gle pattern. 

Price trend. The price trend leading to the rectangle bottom is down- 
ward, which is what separates rectangle bottoms from their top brothers. As 


Focus on Failures 777 


shown in Figure 51.1, I ignore overshoot or undershoot (see the Glossary for 
a definition) before the formation starts, choosing to use the prevailing longer 
price trend instead. 

Horizontal trendlines. Price bounces between two levels, setting up a 
support zone at the bottom and a line of resistance at the top of the rectangle. 
If you connect the minor highs with a trendline, it should be horizontal or 
nearly so. A similar line drawn below the bottoms forms a parallel trendline. 
The two trendlines bound the price action. Occasionally, one of the lines will 
not be exactly horizontal or will break near the end, which is fine as long as the 
slope is not too steep to disturb the overall picture. 

Touches. To prevent misidentification, I require at least five trendline 
touches: three of one trendline and two of the other for a valid rectangle. Each 
touch should be at a minor high or minor low. The touches can be adjacent 
(not alternating) so long as it doesn’t leave too much whitespace behind. 

Figure 51.2 shows three alternating touches labeled with numbers. 
Except for the brief punch through the top in early December (point 2), price 
stays within the two boundary lines until breaking out downward on light vol- 
ume in mid-January. 

Volume. In at least two-thirds of the rectangles I looked at, volume 
trended downward (found using linear regression). Do not discard a rectangle 
because volume slopes upward. Rectangles with a rising volume trend can out- 
perform, too. We’ll see that in Table 51.6. 

Breakout direction. Price breaks out of the rectangle when it closes out- 
side the trendline boundary. The direction can be either up or down, but favors 
an upward breakout in bull markets and downward ones in bear markets. 

Duration. [ like to see rectangles at least 3 weeks long to avoid confusion 
with flags, but patterns shorter than 3 weeks are fine providing they are not 
attached to a flagpole. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 51.3 shows a rectangle bottom in a downtrend. The pattern has two 
trendline touches on the top, several on the bottom, price moves horizontally, 
filling the whitespace with price movement . . . all of which says it’s a valid 
rectangle bottom. 

Price punches through support at 54.75 and 2 days later pulls back to the 
rectangle, stair-stepping its way upward to point A. There, price closes above 
the top rectangle trendline. 

Because the downward breakout sees price drop just 3%, I consider the 
rectangle to be a failure. When price closes above the top of the chart pattern, 
it busts the downward breakout, too. 

Let’s talk about both the breakout and bust. 

Chart patterns that see price move in the breakout direction by no more 
than 5% are what I call 5% failures. Although this rectangle ultimately moves 


778 Rectangle Bottoms 


General Mills Inc (Food Processing, NYSE, GIS) 
it 62 
ly -61 
th 
My i ih fa — 7 
{ Lidia ih, I . 
‘yc W 54 


Pullback laf -51 
i" 


Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 51.3. This is a rectangle bottom failure in a downward price trend. Price 
breaks out downward and drops less than 5% before closing above the for- 
mation top. 


lower after peak A, it does so only after closing above the top of the rectangle. 
If you sold this rectangle short after the downward breakout expecting a price 
decline, you might have been stopped out for a loss. Certainly, your worry 
would have climbed along with price. 

If price moves in the breakout direction no more than 10% (after the 
breakout) and reverses to close outside the other rectangle boundary (in this 
case, that means a close above the pattern’s top), then it busts the breakout. 
Busts happen to almost half of rectangles (see Table 51.9). 

What stops price from declining after a rectangle breakout is the same 
as what stops it for other chart patterns. When buying demand exceeds selling 
pressure, price rises. If this imbalance is strong enough, a trend change occurs 
(price rises more than 20% after a downward breakout). 

I can think of many reasons to explain why buying demand surges: 
Improving fundamentals, traders seeing price hitting underlying support, 
bottom fishing among novice traders, insider buying, even rumors (takeover, 
expected good quarterly earnings, good future outlook) can propel a stock 
higher, sometimes substantially. 

Let’s look at the statistics to better define average behavior. 


Statistics 


Table 51.2 shows general statistics for rectangle bottoms. 


Statistics 779 


Table 51.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 535 367 160 
Reversal (R), continua- 100%R 100% C 100% C 

tion (C) occurrence 
Average rise or decline 48% -16% -26% 
Standard & Poor's 11% -2% -11% 

500 change 
Days to ultimate 202 40 32 

high or low 
How many 56% 28% 57% 


change trend? 


Number found. I catalogued 1,181 rectangle bottoms in 638 stocks with 
the first found in July 1991 and the most recent in December 2019. That span 
covered multiple bull and bear markets. I did not include bear markets with 
upward breakouts, so that’s why the total in the table is smaller than 1,181. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Because rectangle bottoms 
must have price entering the pattern from the top, an upward breakout repre- 
sents a reversal of the price trend and a downward breakout is a continuation. 

Average rise or decline. The best performance from rectangles comes 
in bull markets after upward breakouts. In fact, when the breakout is in the 
same direction as the general market trend, the pattern performs better. 

For example, rectangles in bear markets with downward breakouts show 
declines averaging 26% (trading with the trend), but those in bull markets 
decline an average of just 16% (a countertrend trade). This behavior shows the 
market’s influence, and it reinforces the belief that you should trade with the 
general market trend. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Compare the size of the market’s move 
with the average rise or decline from rectangles. Notice how the general mar- 
ket supports the rectangle’s move. A large drop in the S&P associates with a 
large drop from the rectangle. A large up move in the market translates into a 
large upward move from the rectangle. Countertrend moves are smaller. This 
bears repeating: Trade with the market trend. Add the industry trend to the 
mix, and if all trends agree (market, industry, and stock), then you'll increase 
your chance of having a winning trade. 

Days to ultimate high or low. The following is a calculation I consider 
fun to do. Notice that the drop in bull markets sees price decline an average of 
16% and takes 40 days. In bear markets, the drop measures 26% and takes 32 
days. If you do the math, you'll find that price in bear markets drops twice as 
fast as it does in bull markets. 


780 Rectangle Bottoms 


How many change trend? This is a count of how many rectangles see 
price move more than 20% after the breakout. For upward breakouts, I like to 
see values over 50%. For downward breakouts, I don’t have any guidelines, but 
the big total in bear markets is one reason why this pattern has a performance 
rank of 2. 

Table 51.3 shows failure rates. For small moves, rectangles in bear mar- 
kets (downward breakout) do best, with just 6% failing to drop more than 
5%. When the maximum limit reaches 25%, rectangles in bull markets with 
upward breakouts have lower failure rates. 

Notice how quickly the failure rates climb. In bear markets, a count of 
rectangles failing to drop no more than 10% after the breakout sees the failure 
rate more than triple (to 19%) the breakeven rate. 

Also, notice that the lowest failure rates accompany breakout directions 
that are in line with the general market trend—bull market, upward breakouts 
and bear market, downward breakouts. The countertrend rectangles (bull/ 
down) have higher failure rates. 

Here is another way to use the table. Suppose you have a rectangle with 
a breakout price of 10 and it is 2.50 tall. The measure rule (discussed later in 
the chapter) suggests a drop to 7.50 after a downward breakout. That is a 25% 
drop. How likely is that in a bear market? Answer: 58% will fail to see price 
drop that far. If it happens in bull markets, the failure rate reaches 80%. 

Table 51.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction for the three columns hov- 
ers around random (50%). As I mentioned, the breakout direction favors the 
market trend: upward in bull markets and downward in bear markets. 

Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance over the yearly 
price range says that the best performance comes from rectangles near (within 
a third of) the yearly low. 


Table 51.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 81 or 15% 89 or 24% 10 or 6% 
10 67 or 28% 77 or 45% 20 or 19% 
15 42 or 36% 58 or 61% 21 or 32% 
20 44 or 44% 39 or 72% 18 or 43% 
25 28 or 49% 30 or 80% 24 or 58% 
30 31 or 55% 23 or 86% 14 or 67% 
35 22 or 59% 14 or 90% 10 or 73% 
50 61 or 70% 24 or 96% 29 or 91% 
75 59 or 81% 13 or 100% 14 or 100% 


Over 75 100 or 100% 0 or 100% 0 or 100% 


Statistics 781 


Table 51.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 59% up 41% down 57% down 
Performance of breakouts L 51%, M 44%, L-18%,M-12%, L-27%, M-20%, 
occurring near the H 49% H -10% H —25%* 
12-month low (L), middle 
(M), or high (H) 
Throwbacks/pullbacks 64% 66% 64% 
occurrence 
Average time to throwback/ 7% in 6 days -7% in 6 days -11% in 6 days 
pullback peaks 
Average time to throwback/ 12 days 12 days 12 days 
pullback ends 
Average rise/decline for 43% -15% -21% 


patterns with throw- 
backs/pullbacks 
Average rise/decline for 56% -18% -33% 
patterns without throw- 
backs/pullbacks 


Percentage price 71% 48% 46% 
resumes trend 


Performance with break- 46% -19% -25% 
out day gap 

Performance without break- 48% -15% -26% 
out day gap 

Average gap size $0.39 $0.46 $0.32 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


Throwbacks and pullbacks. When you trade against the prevailing 
market trend, a pullback is more likely (66%) to occur. With the market trend, 
throwbacks or pullbacks occur 64% of the time. 

Price moves in the breakout direction an average of 6 days before revers- 
ing and completing the round-trip back to the breakout in 12 days. 

In all columns, when a throwback or pullback occurs, performance suf- 
fers. In bear markets, it’s especially violent. Price drops 33% if no pullback 
appears but averages a drop of 21% if the stock pulls back. The reason for this, 
I think, is that momentum suffers when a pullback (in this case) or a throw- 
back occurs. 

After a pullback or throwback completes, price tends to rise. Keep that in 
mind when you see a throwback or pullback. In well-behaved chart patterns, 


782 Rectangle Bottoms 


after a pullback completes, you would see price resume dropping, but for 
rectangle bottoms, that happens less than half the time (48%, 46%) as the 
table shows. 

Gaps. Rectangles have few breakout day gaps (191 out of 1,062 patterns). 
The results are mixed as to whether gaps help or hurt performance. 

Table 51.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall rectangles perform better than short ones across all columns 
in the table. For example, tall rectangles in bull markets with upward break- 
outs see price rise 56% after the breakout. Rectangles shorter than the median 
show price rise an average of just 39%. 

‘To use this finding, measure the height of the rectangle from top trend- 
line to the bottom one. Divide by the breakout price (for upward breakouts, 
use the price of the top trendline. For downward breakouts, use the price of 
the bottom trendline). If the result is larger than the median shown in the 
table, then you have a tall pattern. 

Width. Usually, wide patterns perform better than narrow ones, and that’s 
true in two of three columns. The exception is in bear markets, and the num- 
bers are close. Perhaps additional samples would push them into alignment. 


Table 51.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 56% -18% -26% 
Short pattern 39% -13% -25% 
performance 
Median height as 8.3% 9.6% 13.0% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 42% -15% -26% 
performance 
Wide pattern 54% -17% -25% 
performance 
Median width 55 days 55 days 50 days 
Short and narrow 37% -14% -25% 
performance 
Short and wide 44% -12% -23% 
performance 
Tall and wide 57% -19% -25% 
performance 
Tall and narrow 54% -17% -28% 


performance 


Statistics 783 


Height and width combinations. Looking at the combination of 
height and width, you would expect patterns both tall and wide to perform 
best because those traits do well individually. The table shows that is indeed 
the case. Tall and narrow works best in bear markets, which agrees with their 
individual traits, too (meaning tall patterns outperform and narrow patterns 
outperform so the combination of tall and narrow outperforms). 

You might think these results would be obvious, but sometimes the indi- 
vidual traits don’t lead to better performance when you combine them. You see 
that type of behavior in other chart patterns. 

Table 51.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward in more than two of every 
three rectangles. Does it matter if volume trends upward instead? In many 
chart pattern types, the answer is “not really.” They may show a preference, but 
the statistical performance difference is minor. 

Rising/Falling volume. In bull markets after upward breakouts, rectan- 
gles with a rising volume trend substantially outperform those with a falling 
volume. Downward breakouts are mixed, and the performance difference isn’t 
great, either. 

Breakout day volume. Here again, bull markets with upward breakouts 
see substantially better performance if breakout day volume is light (below 
average). Io those who warn of taking a position in a chart pattern showing 
low breakout volume, I say prove it. Yes, heavy breakout volume usually helps, 
but not all of the time and the push isn’t as large as many suggest. 

Table 51.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I split the rec- 
tangle and measured how often the search for the ultimate high or low resulted 
in price touching one of the three locations shown in the table. 

For upward breakouts in bull markets, as an example, price returned to 
the top of the pattern 72% of the time. If you had placed a stop there, it would 
have closed out your trade in almost three of every four trades. 


Table 51.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 71% down 74% down 69% down 
Rising volume trend 59% -17% -25% 

performance 
Falling volume trend 43% -15% -26% 

performance 
Heavy breakout vol- 46% -16% -25% 

ume performance 
Light breakout volume 51% -16% -26% 


performance 


784 Rectangle Bottoms 


Table 51.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 72% 3% 1% 
Middle 21% 13% 16% 
Pattern bottom 4% 65% 63% 

Table 51.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 48% -15% 
2000s 52% -14% 
2010s 41% -18% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 12% 20% 
2000s 12% 31% 
2010s 22% 20% 


Place a stop below the bottom of the pattern and it would trigger just 4% 
of the time on average. 

Before you select one of the locations (or any other location, for that mat- 
ter) consider the size of the loss. Change the potential loss into a percentage of 
the current price and see if you can tolerate such a loss. Adjust your stop loca- 
tion accordingly. You may consider using a volatility stop (see the Glossary) so 
you don’t get stopped out on normal price movement. 

Also note that after price reaches the ultimate high or low, it'll reverse. 
I stopped checking if it then returned to the chart pattern. So if you intend to 
hold a position longer, such as in a buy-and-hold situation, then the stop-out 
rate might be higher than that shown in the table. 

Table 51.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 2010s showed the worst performance for 
upward breakouts and the best for downward ones. Upward breakouts showed 
the best performance in the 2000s and the worst performance after downward 
breakouts. I think all of this makes intuitive sense. Please note that bear mar- 
kets only happened in the 2000s and are not included in the results. 

Failures over time. The bottom portion of the table is more confusing. 
The 2010s showed a big spike in failures for rectangles with upward breakouts. 
Downward breakouts did poorly in the 2000s. 

Table 51.9 shows busted pattern performance. 


Trading Tactics 785 


Table 51.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 137 or 26% 157 or 43% 25 or 16% 
Single bust count 67 or 49% 104 or 66% 13 or 52% 
Double bust count 38 or 28% 2o0r1% 3 or 12% 
Triple+ bust count 32 or 23% 51 or 32% 9 or 36% 
Performance for all -16% 46% 18% 

busted patterns 
Single busted -27% 68% 30% 

performance 
Non-busted -16% 48% 33% 

performance 


Busted patterns count. I made mention of this earlier, but notice how 
downward breakouts in bull markets busted almost half the time (43%). Bear 
markets with downward breakouts bust the fewest number of times. 

The 26% bust rate after upward breakouts in bull markets surprises me. 
Those trades usually sees price soar, so it has me puzzled that over a quarter of the 
time, price reverses quickly and closes below the bottom of the pattern so often. 

Busted occurrence. When a pattern busts, it busts single, double, or 
more than twice (triple+). Notice that downward breakouts tend to see triple+ 
busts happen more often than double busts. I’ve seen this in other chart pat- 
terns, so it’s not unique, but it is unusual and even disconcerting. It’s nothing 
to lose sleep over. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Non-busted patterns perform 
slightly better for downward breakouts but tie for upward breakouts. 

If you can determine when price will single bust (only), that situation will 
lead to better performance than a non-busted pattern except in bear markets 
where non-busted patterns outperform. 

To trade a busted pattern, I suggest you stick to bull markets with down- 
ward breakouts. The rise after the pattern busts is high enough to consider 
trading. The numbers are averages, so keep that in mind. 

‘To put it another way, if you see a rectangle bottom in a bull market with 
a downward breakout, there’s a 43% chance price won’t drop more than 10% 
(meaning it'll bust the pattern). So not only will the drop be small, but it could 
lead to a big advance. That’s potentially bad news if you short a stock. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 51.10 shows trading tactics. 


786 Rectangle Bottoms 


Table 51.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the height of the rectangle by subtracting the value of the 
trendlines from each other. For upward breakouts, add the height 
to the top trendline; for downward breakouts, subtract the value 
from the bottom trendline. The bottom portion of the table shows 
how often this method works. 


Wait for breakout Since you cannot be sure in which direction a rectangle will break 
out, wait for price to close outside the trendline border before 
trading in the direction of the breakout. Consider avoiding short- 
ing after a downward breakout in bull markets (those bust 43% of 
the time). 


Tall rectangle scalp If the rectangle is tall enough, sell or sell short near the top trendline 
and buy or cover near the bottom trendline. 


Throwbacks, If you have a downward breakout, watch for a pullback and short 
pullbacks the stock or add to your short position once price begins descend- 
ing again. Use the same technique for an upward breakout: Wait 
for the throwback, then initiate or add to your position when 


price rises. 

Other Watch for rectangles forming as the corrective phase of a measured 
move formation and adjust the target price accordingly. 

Stop location See Table 51.7 for stop location guidance. 

Busted trade Single busted rectangles in bull markets after downward breakouts do 


especially well. 


Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching 90% 79% 88% 

half height target 
Percentage reaching 79% 55% 69% 

full height target 
Percentage reach- 60% 28% 39% 

ing 2x height 
Percentage reach- 49% 16% 25% 

ing 3x height 


Measure rule, targets. The first tactic is to determine the predicted 
price target using the measure rule. The rule first finds the height of the rec- 
tangle by subtracting the lowest low from the highest high. In essence, just 
subtract the value of the two trendlines from each other. 

Let’s use Figure 51.5 as an example of this. The top trendline is at 12.44, 
and the bottom one is at 11. The difference, 1.44, is the formation height. Add 
the height to the value of the top trendline to get the upward breakout target 
(13.88) and subtract it from the value of the lower trendline to get the down- 
ward breakout target (9.56). 


Trading Tactics 787 


The bottom portion of the table shows how often this method works. 
For example, the figure shows the rectangle in a bull market with an upward 
breakout. Using the full height (which we did), price will reach the target 79% 
of the time, on average. Cut the height in half and add it to the top trendline 
for a closer target that will see price reach it 90% of the time. 

Once you have selected your target, compute the distance from the near- 
est rectangle trendline to the target and divide by the current price. Compare 
the result to the values listed in Table 51.3. 

For example, if the distance is $5 and the breakout price (the current price) 
is $50, that’s a 10% move. For upward breakouts in bull markets, Table 51.3 
says that 28% will fail to see price rise more than 10%. That sounds reasonable 
for a target location. 

Wait for breakout. Since you cannot predict the breakout direction with 
complete accuracy (price tends to break out upward in bull markets and down- 
ward in bear markets), wait for the breakout before investing. Place the trade 
after price closes outside the rectangle trendline, and then trade with the trend. 
Using the closing price helps avoid false breakouts, but it also means you'll be 
initiating a trade late. 

If you’re a swing trader, I’d place a buy order a penny above the top 
trendline (or a penny below the bottom trendline). You may suffer a premature 
breakout, but you'll be into the trade in a more timely manner, and probably at 
a better price than waiting for the opening price a day after a breakout. 

Tall rectangle scalp. If the rectangle is tall enough, consider placing 
an intraformation trade near the two trendlines. Short at the top when price 
begins descending, and cover when it nears the bottom trendline. At the bot- 
tom, buy long and sell when price nears the top trendline. Keep in mind that 
price might break out downward or upward, respectively. 

Only try this type of trading if you’re an experienced swing trader and 
only if the rectangle is tall enough (perhaps in one direction only, like upward 
in bull markets and hope for an upward breakout, so you’d hold on longer at 
the top trendline). 

Throwbacks, pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks allow investors or 
traders another opportunity enter a new position, add to an existing position, 
or get out with a smaller loss. Consider taking advantage of it, but wait for 
price to complete the throwback or pullback before placing a trade. The rea- 
son for waiting is that price may continue in the adverse direction. 

Other. Sometimes, rectangle bottoms form as the corrective phase of 
a measured move chart pattern. See Chapter 46, Measured Move Down, for 
information on how to take advantage of the situation. 

Stop location. Table 51.7 discusses where to place a stop-loss order. 
Don’t forget to change the potential loss into a percentage of the current price 
to see if you can tolerate such a loss. 

Busted trade. See Table 51.9 when considering trading a busted pattern. 
Busted downward breakouts in bull markets work especially well if the rectan- 
gle single busts. And single busts happen two-thirds of the time. Hint. Hint. 


788 Rectangle Bottoms 


Table 51.11 
Special Features 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Partial rise, success 75% 80% 
Partial decline, success 77% 60% 


Table 51.11 shows special features of the rectangle. If you are not famil- 
iar with a partial rise or decline, consult the book’s Glossary. 

Partial rises and declines are reliable predictors of breakout direction. For 
example, an upward breakout follows a partial decline 77% of the time (bull 
market). A downward breakout follows a partial rise 75% of the time. As good 
as those numbers are, trading with them isn’t as easy as it sounds. Try using a 
trading simulator to test your skills before using real money. 


Experience 


Puget Sound Energy (PSD) in 2006 formed a tall and long rectangle, which I 
show in Figure 51.4 at A. 

A trendline drawn along the peaks touched the line several times and 
another trendline drawn along the bottoms also touched that line multiple 
times. Price crosses the pattern from top to bottom, filling the whitespace with 
price movement. That’s how a rectangle bottom is supposed to appear. At B, a 
partial decline correctly predicts an upward breakout, but I didn’t use that as an 
early entry signal. Rather, I waited for the day after the breakout before buying. 

Here’s some information from my notebook: “Stop, % loss: 19.97, -9%. 
I want to keep this wide just in case it throws back [it did not throw back]. This 
is intended to be a longer term holding. Volatility stop: $20.97, -4.0%. Minor 
low stop: 20.76, — 5.0% on 23 June 2006.” 

I’m not sure which stop I used, but what surprises me is that I used one at 
all. Usually I don’t use a stop on a long-term holding. 

The utility average was trending high, which is what I like to see from the 
market (for this electric utility). Upside target was 23.70, a big W target on 3 
October 2005. I show the big W as the left side at G, bottom at H and I, but 
the pattern didn’t perform as expected (no tall right side). However, the stock 
did pause on its way higher at J, where it moved sideways for a few weeks, mir- 
roring the peak at G. 

My scoring system says this was a —2 with a 27.52 target. The —2 means 
it’s less favorable than usual that the stock will climb that far. See my book, 
Trading Classic Chart Patterns (Wiley, 2002). 

I bought on 13 July 2006 (C) and received a fill at 21.86. Then I waited to 
collect my dividend checks as the price climbed. 


Experience 789 


Puget Energy, Inc (PSD) E 


- 23 


-22 
* Stop Location 


AA 4) 
| My * Stop Location 
i \ 4 Hy wth i Ay Vf -21 
| Phy * Stop Location 
Wt -20 
lov = Dec Jan06 Feb = Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan07 Feb Mar 


I i; 


05 = Oct 


Figure 51.4 A trade in this rectangle resulted in a profit. 


Four days after I bought, I raised the stop to 20.76, just below the minor 
low on 23 June. See the lowest black dot on the chart. It shows the approxi- 
mate price and time when I moved my stop. Nine days later I raised it again, to 
21.13, “below a minor low. Earnings are due out 4 August, so I want to keep the 
stop a bit wide in case of an adverse report.” The chart shows the new location 
(the middle black dot). 

On 7 August, I raised the stop for the last time, to 21.71, shown as the 
highest black dot. About a month later, “6 September 2006. I canceled the stop 
because I wanted to hold it longer term and I feel I might be stopped out.” 

The stock formed a rectangle top at D. At E, the stock peaked and started 
moving down. 

At F, 16 January 2007, I wrote this in my notebook: “Sell reason: The util- 
ity average is heading lower. The utility stocks I own are all showing weakness 
and also the ones I follow. I hate to sell, but it’s the wise course. Other stocks 
will do better this year than utilities in the short-term anyway. This is complet- 
ing a pullback to the trendline, and it’ll soon continue down.” I made 16% on 
the trade, including dividends. 

I’m not sure to what trendline I’m referring, but I show a likely candidate 
at K. The stock did continue lower but only the next day. From there, it built a 
broadening top pattern (not shown) and eventually found the ultimate high at 
28.60 before the 2007-2009 bear market pulled the rug from under the stock. 
It bottomed at 19.03 in 28 October 2008. 


¢ Lesson: If you want current income, utility stocks provide a good way 
to participate in both income and capital gains. Income-producing 
stocks offer some downside protection in bear markets. 


790 Rectangle Bottoms 


¢ Lesson: Utility stocks can be slow movers. Other stocks won’t pay big 
dividends, but the capital appreciation could be higher. 

¢ Lesson: Try for a balanced portfolio of income-producing stocks and 
those better suited for large capital gains. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 51.5 shows a paper trade I made. The rectangle bottom appeared after 
price dropped from a high of 20.63 in October 1997 (not shown). The drop 
was a painful one, but it did not occur all at once. Price dropped quite rapidly 
to 15 where it moved horizontally for 8 months. Then the second half of the 
decline took over, and price reached a low of about 11. 

Price bounced off the low several times like a boy taking his first steps 
on a trampoline. They were tentative, shaky, with not much enthusiasm. Then 
in mid-October 1998, price touched the bottom trendline and moved quickly 
across the rectangle to tie the September high at 12.38. A few more oscillations 
and the two trendline boundaries became apparent. 

If you look at the overall picture, you might think that price would con- 
tinue down—a downward breakout (following the downward inbound trend). 
I could not tell which direction price would go, so I decided to wait for the 


Shelby Williams Industries, Inc (Furn/Home Furnishings, NYSE, SY) 


1! -16 
if i 
rly ty yy 
basal Mal ‘Mh, fl Ls -15 
i) 
et I ay. 
1 
" Upward 
i Breakout ale 
{ Target | 
i Stock Bought Lt 
Pre-Formation 9 
Rise i yt | -13 
Support 
Zone 
. ae -10 
Apr 98 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 99 Feb 


Figure 51.5 Rectangle bottom followed by upward breakout. The measure rule 
applied to this rectangle bottom computes the formation height as the difference 
between the trendlines. Adding the difference to the value of the top trendline 
gives an upward breakout target of 13.88. 


Sample Trade 791 


breakout. If the formation acted as a consolidation, then the breakout would 
be downward. However, with a two-step downtrend from the high at 20.63, 
this reminded me of a measured move down with a long corrective phase. 
I thought it might break out upward. If the rectangle were taller, I would try an 
intraformation trade (buy at 11.13, sell at 12.38, and then reverse). 

In early December, price pierced the top trendline and closed above it, 
staging an upward breakout. I noticed the breakout the day after it happened 
and bought the stock at 13, midrange for the day. 

I estimated that a support zone had formed at 11.75, so I placed a stop at 
11.63. Price had stopped at this level just before the chart pattern formed and 
again just before the December breakout. A better stop would have been just 
below the lower rectangle trendline because both trendlines act as support or 
resistance zones. However, I did not want to take such a large loss (15%+). 

A day after buying the stock, price returned to the rectangle formation 
to do more work. Price slowly, agonizingly, moved lower until hitting my stop 
in late December. I took a paper loss of 11%. After a second upward breakout, 
price continued rounding over, then dropped, and finally hit bottom at 8.88 in 
March 1999 before recovering to 16 and change. 


52 


Rectangle Tops 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price trends up to the rectangle and then oscillates between two horizon- 
tal trendlines before breaking out. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish Short-term bullish 
continuation continuation 
Performance rank 4 out of 39 16 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 15% 15% 
Average rise 51% 24% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
‘Throwbacks 66% 70% 
Percentage meeting 78% 60% 
price target 
See also Flags, measured move up, rectangle 
bottoms 


792 


Tour 793 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish reversal 
Performance rank 32 out of 36 
Breakeven failure rate 34% 
Average drop 13% 
Volume trend Downward 
Pullbacks 64% 
Percentage meeting price target 54% 


If you think of a rectangle as a horizontal consolidation region or a flat base 
that price uses as a springboard to a strong move, then rectangles are easier to 
identify and the statistics more meaningful. 

Rectangle tops are solid performers in bull markets with upward break- 
outs as the Results Snapshot shows. They rank fourth for performance out of 
39 pattern types, where 1 is best. 

The other two entries, bear markets with upward breakouts and bull mar- 
kets with downward breakouts, have bad and awful performance, respectively. 

The breakeven failure rate in bear markets ranks 12 out of 20 (not shown, 
where | is best). That’s the best (fewest failures) of the bunch. And you'll notice 
that only upward breakouts appear for the bear market. That’s because down- 
ward breakouts are too rare to include in the chapter. 

What does a rectangle top look like? Let me dig up some family photos 
to show you. 


Tour 


Figure 52.1 shows an example of a rectangle top. Price begins its upward trek 
in June 1992 at 14 (not shown) and reaches the rectangle in May of the follow- 
ing year. The stock consolidates for over a month, bouncing between overhead 
resistance at 24.63 and underlying support at 23.63. A trendline drawn across 
the minor highs is horizontal as is another trendline connecting the minor 
lows. There are a number of touches of both trendlines, suggesting a reliable 
chart pattern. 

The volume pattern begins in the typical manner—receding. However, 
about two-thirds of the way to the breakout, the pattern changes. Volume gets 
heavier as if building pressure for an upcoming release. Then, mysteriously, 
volume subsides when price moves horizontally just below the top trendline 
for over a week (in June). When price pierces the top trendline, volume picks 


794 Rectangle Tops 


Williams Companies Inc (Natural Gas (Diversified), NYSE, WMB) 
— 32 
hha 
Fi Me hy 31 
l 


vi [me : 30 


_29 
a -28 
-27 
i! - 26 
t 


| ! =25 
rfl \" " Ta ‘i — 
Partial - 23 


pl Decline _22 


i 


0 yer ll -—21 
hi I lI 


Jett 
| 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 52.1 Rectangle top with an upward breakout performs well in this uptrend. 


up but not remarkably so. Volume just builds on the expanding trend that is 
developing since price began sliding along the trendline top. 

Price climbs away from the rectangle in this example. There is a slight, 
3-day dip in late June when it looks as if price is trying to throw back to the 
formation top, but buying demand is just too strong. Price changes its mind 
and turns around to continue up. 

Why do rectangles form? A rectangle chart pattern is a struggle between 
the haves and the have-nots. Those who own the stock but want to sell have 
identified a price at which they are willing to part with their shares. When the 
price reaches that level, they sell, forcing the stock down. When price falls, 
they quit dumping the stock. 

On the other side is another group of investors who want to grab the 
stock. They place buy orders at what they perceive to be a good value. When 
price falls to their target, the buy orders overwhelm supply and price rises. 
If this up-down struggle goes on long enough, price bounces between one 
extreme and the other. 

Over time, you can draw a horizontal trendline along the peaks and 
another along the valleys as a rectangle pattern takes shape. Eventually, one 
of the sides runs out of ammunition. If the people selling their shares run out 
first, buying demand overwhelms supply and price pierces the top trendline. 

If the buyers spend all of their money and back away from the table, price 
drops through the bottom of the rectangle. In either case, the shares con- 
tinue in the breakout direction because of growing demand (the price moves 
upward) or increasing supply (the price tumbles). 


Identification Guidelines 795 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 52.1 shows identification guidelines for rectangle tops. 

Appearance. Price rises and bumps up against overhead resistance, stop- 
ping the climb. At the bottom of the pattern, the stock bounces off a floor 
of support. Between the two layers, price oscillates up and down, but moves 
horizontally, eventually pushing through the wall of support or resistance and 
breaking out. 

Price trend. Over the short term, price should trend upward to the rec- 
tangle. This upward trend is what distinguishes the pattern from rectangle 
bottoms. The distinction is arbitrary; I wanted to see if there is any difference 
in the way the two chart patterns perform. 

Horizontal trendlines. As the rectangle forms, price rises to a resistance 
level and falls back to a support area for another try. If this pattern contin- 
ues, the minor highs can be joined with a trendline drawn along the top of 
the rectangle and another trendline can be drawn below the minor lows. The 
two trendlines should be horizontal or nearly so. If there is a slight tilt to the 
trendline, do not worry as long as it does not disturb the overall appearance of 
a congestion region. 

Touches. To qualify as a rectangle, price must touch the trendlines at 
least five times. That’s three touches of one trendline and two of the other. 
The touches need not alternate from one trendline to the other, but the minor 
highs and lows must be distinct. Price must also cross the pattern from top to 
bottom plenty of times to erase the whitespace. Avoid connecting two peaks 
and two valleys and calling it a rectangle. 


Table 52.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price moves horizontally for weeks or months, bouncing between 
a layer of support and a ceiling of resistance until eventually 
breaking out. 


Price trend The short-term price trend leading to the rectangle top should be up. 

Horizontal Two horizontal (or nearly so) trendlines outline the price action, one 
trendlines above the minor highs and one below the minor lows. 

Touches There should be at least five touches of the trendlines (three on one 


side and two on the other). Price must cross the pattern enough to 
cover the whitespace. 


Volume Volume usually recedes until the breakout. 

Breakout Can be any direction. A breakout occurs when price closes outside one 
direction of the trendline boundaries. 

Duration Usually longer than 3 weeks to distinguish it from a flag. If shorter 


than 3 weeks, the rectangle top should not be preceded by 
a flagpole. 


796 Rectangle Tops 


Volume. The volume trend varies from rectangle to rectangle but usu- 
ally recedes. Many of the charts accompanying this chapter show such a trend. 

Breakout direction. Price can break out in any direction it feels like, but 
favors upward. That’s true for both bull and bear markets. 

Duration. Flags can masquerade as short rectangles, so I place a limit 
on their length of 3 weeks. Patterns longer than that are rectangles. Patterns 
shorter than that can also be rectangles, providing there is no flagpole attached 
to the pattern. A flagpole is a straight-line run up or down followed by the flag. 
Without a flagpole, you don’t have a flag. You have a rectangle. 

Figure 52.2 shows what a rectangle top looks like. Price trends upward 
leading to the rectangle. Then the stock bounces between support at 54 and 
overhead resistance at 59.50. The wide, tall rectangle has plenty of trendline 
touches. If you are lucky, you might be able to get two or three trades from 
this pattern (as marked by the numbers on the figure). Each top-to-bottom 
pass represents a price change of about $5, plenty of profit opportunity to be 
of interest to experienced swing traders. 

The volume pattern trends downward over the length of the chart pat- 
tern. Near the end of the pattern, volume spurts upward, propelling price 
higher until the stock breaks out and zooms to new a high. Statistics sug- 
gest that the majority of rectangles have receding volume trends. I would not 
exclude a rectangle top simply because it has a rising volume trend. If you see 
a tattoo, though, then that’s another story. I don’t like tattoos. 


Fluor Corp (Building Materials, NYSE, FLR) 


| bls vf: “8s 
ii | We 


| -59 


hy 2 3 -58 


Mp 
i ll 1 Wy 
| Il 


hy of 


Ny 


\, it ali “3 
i bal iy il “8 


May 95 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb 


Figure 52.2 A rectangle top with a receding volume trend. Although most rec- 
tangles exhibit receding volume, do not automatically exclude those with rising 
volume. Three profitable trading opportunities are marked where price crosses 
from one side of the rectangle to the other. 


Focus on Failures 797 


Focus on Failures 


Of the nearly 1,700 rectangles I reviewed, about 20% fail. Figure 52.3 shows 
an example of a failure. 

The rectangle shows an upward price trend climbing into the pattern even 
if you ignore the undershoot of about 2 weeks before the start of the rectangle. 
The stock moves sideways, bumping up against overhead resistance in two 
minor high touches and underlying support with three minor low touches. 

‘Two trendlines connecting peaks and valleys show a horizontal price 
trend. The rectangle is a valid chart pattern in this example. 

Price breaks out of the rectangle at 35.63 and reaches a new high of 37. 
However, it stalls in mid-April before turning around and throwing back to the 
top trendline. Once price settles on a new direction, it heads down ata good clip. 
The brief climb represents a 4% price rise above the top trendline. I consider 
anything less than 5% in the breakout direction to be a failure. The failure 
confirms when price closes beyond the side opposite the breakout (below the 
bottom in this case). When that happens, it busts the upward breakout. 

I highlight 5% failures because I wanted a method to catalog poorly 
performing chart patterns. Look at this another way: Had you bought this 
stock when it left the rectangle top, would you be upset when it throws back 
to the top trendline and continues lower? You might even take a loss if you are 
not quick enough to exit the trade. 


International Flavors and Fragrances (Chemical (Specialty), NYSE, IFF) 


i ie . 
a me 
' Mh, t " i! | 
; I i| i [hi | \ | fil ~35 
| i | Mn lh l y ‘| Throwback I 
i ae a 


allt Pre-Formation i 32 
if Drop 


Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 52.3 A 5% failure of a rectangle top. Price follows the existing trend 
upward but only for a little gain before heading back into the rectangle and shoot- 
ing out the other side. 


798 Rectangle Tops 


Several of my trades follow the profile shown in the figure: an upward 
breakout followed by a reversal. After that reversal, price continues down as if 
it forgot that a throwback is supposed to see price recover once it completes. 


Statistics 


Table 52.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,804 rectangle tops in 732 stocks with the first 
pattern located in July 1991 and the most recent in December 2019. Not all 
stocks covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. I removed 122 
bear market patterns because they didn’t meet the 150-pattern minimum for 
this edition. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Since we are dealing with 
tops, upward breakouts from rectangles act as continuations of the uptrend 
while downward breakouts are reversals by definition. 

Average rise or decline. Rectangle tops in bull markets with upward 
breakouts put in a stellar performance: Price rises an average of 51%. It’s why 
the pattern has a performance rank of five. The other two columns, from left 
to right, have mediocre and yucky performance, respectively. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The general market helped upward 
breakouts in bull markets (a rising tide lifts all boats). The other two columns 
don’t show numbers high enough to assist much with pattern performance. All 
of this is speculation, of course, but I do know that the general market helps 
stock performance. 

Days to ultimate high or low. I compared the velocity of upward 
breakouts in bull and bear markets and found that the bear market rise was 
1.4 times the rate of the bull market climb. Doesn’t that just curl your toes 
with delight? 


Table 52.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 945 171 566 
Reversal (R), continuation 100% C 100% C 100% R 

(C) occurrence 
Average rise or decline 51% 24% -13% 
Standard & Poor's 12% -1% -2% 

500 change 
Days to ultimate 227 79 43 

high or low 


How many change trend? 59% 42% 21% 


Statistics 799 


How many change trend? This item is a measure of how many rectan- 
gle tops see price rise more than 20% after a breakout. For bullish patterns, I 
consider values over 50% to be top notch. I don’t have a benchmark for down- 
ward breakouts, though. However, the statistics say that the two right columns 
fall short of the averages for other chart pattern types. 

Table 52.3 shows failure rates for rectangle tops as a frequency distribu- 
tion of gains or losses. For example, 15% of rectangles with upward breakouts 
in bull markets fail to see price climb more than 5%. A third (35%) will fail 
to see price rise more than 15%. Half will top out after rising less than 30%. 

The other two columns show even worse performance. 

How useful is the list? If you use the measure rule to get the potential 
gain, then this table becomes quite useful. Suppose you have a stock you wish 
to buy and the measure rule says the target is 20% away from the current price. 
How likely will it be to make money trading a rectangle top with an upward 
breakout? Answer: 41% of rectangles in bull markets will fail and 58% of them 
in bear markets will also fail on average. 

Table 52.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. I checked how often price broke out upward or 
downward from rectangles and they are shown in the table. Rectangle tops 
prefer to break out upward, even in bear markets (which should be a surprise). 

Yearly position, performance. Where do the best performing rectangle 
tops reside? Those within a third of the yearly low perform better than the 
other two thirds. Consult the table for the range you should avoid trading; it 
varies depending on market conditions and breakout directions. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about 
two-thirds of the time, and it takes price an average of 6 days before the price 
trend reverses and heads back to the breakout. In 11 or 12 days, total, the stock 
completes the round-trip. 


Table 52.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
or Decline (%) Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 146 or 15% 26 or 15% 194 or 34% 
10 115 or 28% 30 or 33% 109 or 54% 
15 70 or 35% 23 or 46% 83 or 68% 
20 52 or 41% 20 or 58% 62 or 79% 
25 55 or 46% 11 or 64% 39 or 86% 
30 59 or 53% 17 or 74% 20 or 90% 
35 37 or 57% 11 or 81% 23 or 94% 
50 117 or 69% 15 or 89% 25 or 98% 
75 95 or 79% 9 or 95% 10 or 100% 


Over 75 199 or 100% 9 or 100% lor 100% 


800 Rectangle Tops 


Table 52.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 63% up 58% up 37% down 
Performance of breakouts L 53%, L 30%, L-17%, 

occurring near the M 47%, M 26%, M -13%, 

12-month low (L), middle H 52% H 23% H-11% 

(M), or high (H) 
Throwbacks/pullbacks 66% 70% 64% 


occurrence 


Average time to throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


7% in 6 days 


8% in 6 days 


-6% in 6 days 


Average time to throwback/ 12 days 11 days 12 days 
pullback ends 

Average rise/decline 48% 22% -13% 
for patterns with 
throwbacks/pullbacks 

Average rise/decline 56% 31% -13% 


for patterns without 
throwbacks/pullbacks 


Percentage price 72% 59% 48% 
resumes trend 


Performance with 48% 18% -12% 
breakout day gap 

Performance without 52% 26% -13% 
breakout day gap 

Average gap size $0.32 $0.17 $0.30 


When a throwback or pullback occurs, performance suffers, but that’s 
only true after upward breakouts. Downward breakouts don’t show a perfor- 
mance difference for rectangles. 

Once a throwback or pullback completes, price resumes rising. That’s 
even true in bull markets after downward breakouts. In that case, price resumes 
moving up 52% of the time (with the other 48% continuing down, as the 
table shows). 

Gaps. If a breakout day gap is absent, performance improves. That find- 
ing contradicts trading lore, which says gaps help performance. Of course, 
you're going to have some exceptions, and this is one of them (three, really, 
one in each column). 

If you turn to the statistics in Chapter 1 about gaps, you'll see that they 
work best in bull markets, especially during downward breakouts. They can 
also help in bear markets, but it’s almost random. 


Statistics 801 


Table 52.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 60% 27% -16% 
Short pattern performance 42% 21% -9% 
Median height as 7.9% 10.0% 7.1% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 45% 22% -11% 
performance 
Wide pattern performance 57% 26% -14% 
Median width 53 days 59 days 49 days 
Short and narrow 40% 22% -9% 
performance 
Short and wide 48% 20% -10% 
performance 
Tall and wide performance 60% 28% -16% 
Tall and narrow 57% 24% -15% 
performance 


Table 52.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall rectangles perform better than short ones. That is a sig- 
nificant finding when you think of a rectangle as a support or resistance zone. 
When you have a tall mass of price coiling up and down and the breakout 
from that congestion region occurs, the resulting run might be worth betting 
on. Think of a rectangle as a tightened spring waiting to unwind. Tall patterns 
mean a bigger spring and more force. 

To use this feature, measure the height of the rectangle from the top 
trendline to the bottom one and divide by the breakout price (that is, the price 
of the top or bottom trendline). If the result is larger than the median listed in 
the table, then you have a tall rectangle. 

Width. Pattern width is a less reliable indicator of performance than 
height. However, wide patterns perform better than narrow ones (using the 
median as the delimiter between narrow and long). The performance differ- 
ence between narrow and wide is large enough that for rectangles it might be 
worth considering width to give your trades an edge. 

Height and width combinations. Pop quiz: If tall rectangles perform 
best, and wide rectangles perform best, will rectangles that are both tall and 
wide perform best? For rectangle tops, the answer is yes. For other chart pat- 
tern types, it’s no (sometimes). You’ll want to avoid short patterns, either wide 
or narrow, but see the table for specifics. 

Table 52.6 shows volume-related statistics. 


802 Rectangle Tops 


Table 52.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 70% down 63% down 70% down 
Rising volume trend 53% 24% -12% 

performance 
Falling volume trend 50% 25% -13% 

performance 
Heavy breakout volume 52% 25% -13% 

performance 
Light breakout volume 47% 22% -11% 

performance 

Table 52.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 71% 71% 3% 
Middle 24% 19% 18% 
Pattern 5% 2% 70% 

bottom 


Volume trend. Volume trends downward more than 63% of the time 
on average, but should you throw away a pattern with a rising volume trend? 

Rising/Falling volume. Answer: no. Rectangles with upward breakouts 
in bull markets show a nice statistical performance advantage if they have a 
rising volume trend. The other two columns favor a falling volume trend. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy volume seen on the breakout day tends to 
push price higher. 

Table 52.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. The hit rate 
varies depending on breakout direction and market condition, but not by 
much. During the search for the ultimate high (upward breakouts), price will 
return to the top of the pattern 71% of the time. Downward breakouts show a 
hit rate of 70% of the time. 

If you place a stop-loss order on the side opposite the breakout, price will 
take out the stop 5% or less of the time. However, you might entail a large 
loss, so divide the potential loss with the current price to get a percentage. If 
the percentage gives you a chill, then perhaps you should look elsewhere for a 
more promising trade. That’s actually sound trading advice. 

Table 52.8 shows the performance over three decades. The table does 
not show performance of patterns 30 years old compared to children. Rather, 
it’s a comparison of how rectangles perform in each decade. 


Statistics 803 


Table 52.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 55% -16% 
2000s 59% -10% 
2010s 38% -12% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 12% 41% 
2000s 11% 38% 
2010s 24% 21% 
Table 52.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 244 or 26% 53 or 31% 290 or 51% 
Single bust count 95 or 39% 39 or 74% 192 or 66% 
Double bust count 68 or 28% 9 or 17% 9 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 81 or 33% 5 or 9% 89 or 31% 
Performance for all -11% -20% 49% 

busted patterns 
Single busted -22% -26% 71% 

performance 
Non-busted -13% -21% 51% 

performance 


Performance over time. Upward breakouts saw the best performance in 
the 2000s, but downward breakouts did best in the 1990s. The 2000s were the 
only decade to have bear markets, so I did not include them in the statistics. 

Failures over time. Downward breakouts show failures becoming less 
frequent. However, upward breakouts show the 2010s as having double the 
failure rate of earlier decades. I’m not sure why that is. Any guesses? 

Table 52.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. This is a count of the number of rectangles that 
see price move no more than 10% away from the breakout before reversing and 
trending in the new direction. It ranges from 26% to 51%. Half of rectangle 
tops in bull markets after downward breakouts will bust. Holy expletive! 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the types of busts into three bins: single, 
double, and more than two busts (triple+). Single busts take first place for 
frequency, and triple+ busts usually come in second followed by double busts. 


804 Rectangle Tops 


Busted and non-busted performance. I compared busted rectangle 
tops with their non-busted brothers and found that single busted patterns 
outperformed their non-busted siblings. The best performance comes in bull 
markets after busted downward breakouts. Those see price rise an average of 
71%. That’s a huge gain. It measures from the top of the pattern to the new 
ultimate high. 

Because it’s obvious when the downward breakout busts in a rectangle 
top, you should have time to place a buy stop at the top of the pattern and 
enter the trade when it completes the bust. The kicker is you don’t know if it'll 
single bust, but the statistics say that two of three trades will single bust. That’s 
good news, too. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 52.10 shows trading tactics. 
Measure rule, targets. The measure rule sets a target price. To find the 
target, compute the height of the rectangle by subtracting the value of the 


Table 52.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the height of the rectangle from trendline to trendline. For 
upward breakouts, add the height to the top trendline; for downward 
breakouts, subtract it from the bottom trendline. The result is the target 
price. The bottom portion of the table shows how often this works. 


Tall rectangle If the rectangle is tall enough, sell or sell short near the top trendline 
scalp and buy or cover near the bottom one. 
Other Watch for rectangles forming as the corrective phase of a measured 
move up pattern and adjust the target price accordingly. 
Stop location Use Table 52.7 for location guidance. 
Busted trade Downward breakouts in bull markets that bust lead to strong gains. 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half 90% 83% 75% 
height target 
Percentage reaching full 78% 60% 54% 
height target 
Percentage reach- 62% 42% 32% 
ing 2x height 
Percentage reach- 51% 27% 18% 


ing 3x height 


Trading Tactics 805 


lower trendline from the upper one. Add the difference to the top trendline 
for upward breakouts and subtract it from the bottom trendline for downward 
breakouts. The result is the target price. 

For an example of the measure rule and how it applies to rectangles, con- 
sider the rectangle top pictured in Figure 52.4. The top trendline has a value 
of 38.75, whereas the bottom one perches at 33.75. The difference of 5 is the 
height of the rectangle. If this rectangle were to break out downward, then 
the target price would be 28.75, or the price of the lower trendline minus the 
height. Since the breakout is upward, add the height to the price of the top 
trendline, giving a target of 43.75. Price reaches the target about a month after 
the breakout. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches the tar- 
get. In our example, we used the full height and it was in a bull market. Accord- 
ing to the table, price should reach the target 78% of the time, on average. For 
a closer target, slice the height in half and insert it into the equation. Doing 
that boosts the success rate to 90%. 

Table 52.3 shows how that table can help when choosing a target. Read 
the discussion for that table for more information. 

Tall rectangle scalp. If the rectangle is tall enough and providing you 
discover it quickly enough, you can trade the formation as it swings from 
trendline to trendline. Short or sell at the top trendline and cover or buy at the 
bottom trendline. I discussed doing this in Figure 52.2, so read that section as 
an example. 

Only attempt this if you’re an experienced swing trader. 

Other. Before placing a trade in a rectangle top, see if it is part of a larger 
pattern. Sometimes, the rectangle is the horizontal part, called the corrective 
phase, of a measured move up chart pattern. Knowing that a rectangle is a 
subpart of a measured move allows you to get a better gauge on the expected 
price move. 

Stop location. Table 52.7 shows the probability of price hitting a stop, 
based on various rectangle locations. Be sure to change the potential loss into a 
percentage of the current price to see if you can tolerate such a loss. A common 
stop-loss target is 8%. 

Busted trade. Because the performance of the rectangle top isn’t that 
good, consider trading busted downward breakouts in bull markets. Price must 
drop by no more than 10% below the bottom trendline, reverse, and close 
above the top of the rectangle. If price rises more than 10%, it’s a single busted 
pattern. Single busts see an average rise of 71%. Also, single busted patterns 
occur 66% of the time, so you should be able to have some luck with this setup. 

Table 52.11 shows special features of rectangle tops: partial rises and 
declines. Figure 52.1 shows an example (not really a good one, though) of what 
a partial decline looks like, in case you are unfamiliar with them. Consult the 
Glossary for more information on partial rises and declines. 


806 Rectangle Tops 


Table 52.11 
Special Features 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Partial rise, success 75% 71% 
Partial decline, success 79% 74% 


A partial decline is slightly more reliable in predicting the breakout direc- 
tion than is a partial rise, as the table shows. In many cases, it may be difficult to 
determine when a partial rise or decline is happening because of the way price 
tends to pause as it crosses the rectangle, but if you can identify them, they 
allow entry into a trade before the breakout. On average, your profits should 
be larger with lower risk, providing you use stops to limit adverse moves. 

If price touches the horizontal rectangle trendline and reverses instead 
of breaking out, close out the trade immediately. Chances are price is going to 
cross the rectangle to the other side. 


Experience 


I have used rectangle tops to enter trades. In several of the trades, some of 
which I discuss below, Pll buy the breakout and price will reverse, often within 
a few days. Not only will price reverse, but it collapses, many times staging a 
big loss (FMC, WEX, LRW, and DFG). 


FMC Corp 


From a low set in 2003, FMC Corp. (FMC) stock continued an uptrend bro- 
ken only by the 2008 bear market (when price dropped 64%). Once that com- 
pleted in October, the stock resumed the uptrend and suffered another setback 
in the summer of 2011 when the stock dropped 31%. 

When a rectangle top appeared in late 2013, I became interested because 
I was looking for a stock with a history of a long-term uptrend. My thinking 
was that all I had to do was pick the right stock, open my hand, and collect 
money for as long as I held it. 

I made a perfect entry by buying the stock at the opening price the day after 
an upward breakout. The stock peaked two days later and then dived. It busted 
the upward breakout by closing below the bottom rectangle trendline. Drat! 

The stock reversed and climbed 25%, so I was making money again. All 
of this didn’t bother me too much. I was in the trade for the long term. 

The blasted stock reversed again and started heading lower. When the 
company issued an earnings warning, I decided to sell and took a loss (6%) ona 


Experience 807 


small position. The stock dropped to almost 51, a decline of 39% as measured 
from the prior high. This is one of the rectangles that triple busted. 


¢ Lesson: When fundamentals change for the worse, sell, which is what I 
did and avoided a substantial loss. 

¢ Lesson: Own a diversified portfolio so losses will hurt like pinpricks 
instead of amputation. 


Northwest Pipe Co 


Northwest Pipe (NWPX) suffered an 82% decline between 2014 and 2016. I 
became interested in the recovery when I saw a cloud bank pattern. The base 
of the cloud was 19 to 21, which became my target. When a rectangle top 
appeared, I bought on the breakout day. The stock went vertical and neared my 
target less than 2 months after I bought. Did I sell? No. This was a long-term 
holding so I hung on. 

The stock retraced back to the rectangle top, giving back all of my gains. 
Then it turned and climbed back to the cloud base. In January 2018, I wrote in 
my trading notebook, “This didn’t go anywhere this past year, but what scares 
the willy out of me is the negative analyst view.” Because the stock had hit my 
target, I sold and made over 50% on the trade. For an expanded review of the 
cloudbank trade, see the Experience section of Chapter 18. 


¢ Lesson: For a cloudbank play, if the stock reaches the target sooner 
than expected, sell. Remember, it often takes as long to traverse the 
cloud as it does to reach it. I could have sold a year earlier than I did 
and looked elsewhere for a more promising trade. 


Wex Inc 


Wex Inc. (WEX) was a poorly executed trade. I bought into the stock using a 
buy stop and got in at the breakout, right on time. Price threw back and busted 
the upward breakout when it slid below the bottom of the rectangle, dropping 
7%. The stock recovered and made a new high, then dropped 36%. Ouch. This 
trade was meant as another long-term holding, and thankfully, I held only a 
small position, too. 

I waited out the decline and rode the stock back up. In 2019, it formed 
an unconfirmed head-and-shoulders top, so I sold the thing and pocketed 7%. 
Five months later, the stock was 65% below where I sold, a casualty of the 
Covid-19 pandemic. Thank goodness I sold. 


¢ Lesson: Bad trades often go bad quickly. The smart play would have 
been to let a stop take me out of the trade when it closed below the 


808 Rectangle Tops 


rectangle bottom. I would have taken a loss but traded it well. Even 
though this was a small position and I made a profit, the 15-month 
hold time was too long for such a meager return. 


Labor Ready 


A long and choppy rectangle top formed in Labor Ready (LRW) starting from 
June 2005 to the spring of 2006. When the stock broke out of the congestion 
region, I bought. From my notes: “The only problem I see with the trade is the 
market direction [is] predicted to be down.” 

Four days later, I was out of the trade for a 5% loss. Well, spit! What 
happened? From my notebook: “Sell reason: Failure swing in RSI [Wilder’s 
relative strength index] suggested price would drop. With the consolidation 
region showing hints of moving down, I felt it was time to sell. Unfortunately, 
I didn’t sell yesterday but dumped it today using my broker’s ’market on close’ 
selling option. 


¢ “Lesson: Since I saw the failure swing, I should have sold at market close 
(MOC: market-on-close) the day before I did. Had I done that, I could 
have saved $. But I remembered to try that 3 minutes after the mar- 
ket closed and my broker needs a 20-minute head start for those MOC 
trades.” 


About 2.5 months later, the stock was 43% lower, so I dodged a bullet. 


Delphi Financial Group 


Delphi Financial Group (DFG) seems to be typical of my rectangle trades. In 
this case, I bought after a throwback to a long rectangle top that formed from 
September 2006 to May 2007. Price slid back below the top of the rectangle, 
so I sold for a 5% loss. The stock continued going down and bottomed 82% 
below my sale price. 


¢ Lesson: Sell quickly before a loss becomes larger. 


American Power Conversion Corp 


American Power Conversion Corp. (APCC) is an interesting trade after a 
good earnings report. In 2005, the stock broke out upward from a rectangle 
top after the company announced quarterly earnings that were better than 
expected. Price spiked from a close of 20.71 to a high of 25 but closed at almost 
23.1 waited for price to return to earth over the next 10 days or so. 

Here’s what I wrote in my notebook: “Buy reason: Rectangle throwback 
completed on good earnings. I expect the next quarter to report good earnings, 


Sample Trade 809 


too, sending price higher. The rectangle will support the stock, so risk is low 
despite a possible dropping market.” 

I trailed my stop higher as price climbed, and eventually the stock hit my 
stop and took me out of the trade for a gain of 11%. 


¢ Lesson: Price often retraces for a week to 10 days before bottoming 
after a good earnings announcement. The retrace (after it completes) 
represents a good buying opportunity, especially if you expect another 
good quarter to follow. 


Sample Trade 


Dave is an artist. It is tough making a living, and he wants to move to the 
computer world and become a graphics artist. He has been playing around 
with some hardware and software that duplicate the feel of a brush on various 
textures but wants to get the latest versions. 

Recognizing chart patterns comes easily to him. With his keen eye, he has 
been on the prowl for a lucrative stock play. That is one reason he stumbled 
across the rectangle shown in Figure 52.4, but he did not spot the rectangle 
in a timely fashion. The only reason he noticed it is because of the throwback. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks are peculiar enough with their hooking retrace 
that they are easy to spot. One has only to look back and identify the associated 
chart pattern (a rectangle top, in this case). 


Zilog Inc (Semiconductor, NYSE, ZLG) 


-49 
te * if i 
ani 45 
Target Price ats Sold My | | et Ig 
| shat _41 
ee 
hat! Ye Bought Here -37 
It Hl 
{ Lr “a fi “ey Breakaway Gap - 35 
+ 
uy, | I Nee — 33 


Feb 95 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 52.4 Rectangle top with breakaway and exhaustion gaps. Dave bought 
this rectangle after the throwback completed. 


810 Rectangle Tops 


Dave computed the formation height and applied it to the top of the rec- 
tangle to get the expected minimum price move. Did he pull the trigger when 
price threw back to the pattern? No, he waited. He followed the stock closely, 
and when it gapped up (a breakaway gap), he bought and received a fill at 40. 

Each day the stock moved higher, and in 3 days it had reached his target 
price of 43.75. The day after that the stock gapped again (exhaustion gap), 
signaling an impending end of the rise. The day after that, price faltered, and 
that is when he sold and closed out his position at 47.50. He netted over $7 a 
share or 18% in less than a week. 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


53 


Roof 


Appearance: Looks like a pyramid with a central high peak and down-sloping sides 


with a flat or nearly flat bottom. 


Upward Breakouts 


Bull Market 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 

Breakeven failure rate 

Average rise 

Volume trend 

Throwbacks 

Percentage meeting price target 
See also 


Downward Breakouts 


Short-term bullish continuation 

35 out of 39 

26% 

34% 

Downward 

60% 

62% 

Head-and-shoulders tops, complex head-and- 
shoulders tops 


Bull Market 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 

Breakeven failure rate 

Average drop 

Volume trend 

Pullbacks 

Percentage meeting price target 


Short-term bearish reversal 
16 out of 36 

22% 

15% 

Downward 

66% 

63% 


811 


812 Roof 


The roof pattern is a rare gem that looks like a pyramid. Gem is the incorrect 
word because the performance of the 375 patterns (both bull and bear market 
patterns) I found is dismal. It has a 26% failure rate after upward breakouts 
in bull markets and an average rise of just 34%, ranking the pattern near the 
bottom of the list at 35 out of 39 patterns, where a rank of 1 is best. I even con- 
sidered removing the pattern from the book because it’s so rare. Downward 
breakouts show better performance with a rank of 16 out of 36 patterns. 

When you see a roof, you might think it’s a head-and-shoulders top. 
Indeed, a head-and-shoulders top can be a roof, but a roof may not be a head- 
and-shoulders top. The differences between a head-and-shoulders and a roof 
revolve around the inbound (leading to the pattern) and outbound price trend 
(after the breakout). Io some of you, this may be a pa-tay-toe and pa-tah-toe 
thing. However, it’s more complicated than that because the ideal roof doesn’t 
have shoulders. 

Let’s take a tour of the pattern to see what a roof looks like. 


Tour 


I discovered the roof pattern in early 2005. I thought it looked like the top 
half of a diamond, but an acquaintance of mine called it a roof. The name fit, 
and it stuck. 

Figure 53.1 shows an example of a roof pattern (A) in a downward price 
trend. It sports a flat bottom and sides that slope downward from a central 
peak, making it appear like a roof. Price touches the bottom trendline multiple 
times and the pattern’s sides reach for the sloping trendlines, too. 


ADTRAN Inc (ADTN) 


07 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan08 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 53.1 This roof pattern appears in a downward price trend. 


Identification Guidelines 813 


A downward breakout happens at B when price closes below the bottom 
of the pattern. 

Notice that volume (C) slopes downward, which is typical for this pattern. 

This pattern isn’t a complex head-and-shoulders top for several reasons. 
First, price drops down into the pattern from the top (in this example). A head- 
and-shoulders top needs price to rise up into the start of the left shoulder. 

Second, there are too many potential shoulders on the left side that don’t 
have mirror shoulders on the right. It doesn’t Jook like a head-and-shoulders 
top, simple or complex. The roof can break out upward, but a head-and-shoul- 
ders top cannot. 

Let’s discuss identification for this rare pattern. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 53.1 shows identification guidelines, and Figure 53.2 shows another 
example of the roof pattern. 

Appearance. Look for price to form a pyramid shape like that shown at 
A in Figure 53.2. The inbound price trend can be from any direction (up or 
down), so it is not a factor you should consider. You’ll want to avoid select- 
ing patterns that are simple or complex head-and-shoulders tops. Those have 
multiple shoulders (which mirror across the head both in time and price) and 
will break out downward. In fact, if you think you’ve found a roof pattern, you’re 
probably wrong because this pattern is quite rare. So check for a head-and- 
shoulders top or complex head-and-shoulders top. 


Table 53.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Looks like a pyramid with a central high peak and down-sloping sides 
with a flat or nearly flat bottom. 
Trendline At least three minor low touches on the bottom. Price should touch 
touches the side trendlines, too, but | don’t set a minimum touch count 


for them. The side trendlines should slope downward from a 
central peak. 


Horizontal The bottom trendline should be horizontal or nearly so. If it slopes, 
trendline then you might be looking at a simple or complex head-and- 
shoulders top. 
Volume Trends downward the majority of the time from pattern start to end. 
Breakout Downward most often when price closes outside one of the trendline 
direction boundaries, but the breakout can be upward, too. 
Duration The median width is about six weeks long (47-56 days), but | set no 


minimum or maximum. 


814 Roof 


AFLAC Inc (AFL) 


17 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan18 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 53.2 This roof may look like a head-and-shoulders top, but the breakout 
is upward, invalidating the head-and-shoulders. 


Trendline touches. Look for at least three touches of the bottom trend- 
line. Each touch should be a distinct minor low, but allow exceptions. The 
figure shows four touches, conveniently labeled 1 through 4. 

Horizontal trendline. The bottom trendline should be horizontal or 
nearly so. The two top trendlines should slope downward from a peak, like that 
shown, with price touching each trendline. 

Volume. Volume typically trends downward from left to right until the 
breakout, where it might be higher. In the figure, I show an irregularly shaped 
volume trend (C) that peaks in the middle of the pattern. 

Breakout direction. A breakout occurs when price closes beyond one of 
the trendlines. Often the stock will have a downward breakout 58% of the time, 
leaving 42% of roofs breaking out upward. The roof shown in Figure 53.2 has 
an upward breakout at B when the stock closes above the AB trendline. 

Duration. I did not set a minimum duration for roofs, but they typically 
last about six weeks. It takes several weeks to create the flat base and sloping 
roof structure. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 53.3 shows what a roof failure looks like. The pattern outlined at A 
has a left shoulder, B, head at C, and right shoulder, D, and yet it’s not a head- 
and-shoulders top. Why? Because price breaks out upward (at E). Instead, it’s 
a roof chart pattern. This roof has the required flat bottom, but it also shows a 
down-sloping volume trend at F (which is typical). 


Statistics 815 


Alaska Air Group, Inc (ALK) 


ry 
hdl =8 


fe | re vy ‘\ ha ho 


01 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 02 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 53.3 Price breaks out upward from this roof but hits overhead resistance 
and reverses. 


Table 53.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 140 190 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 24% R, 76% C 79% R, 21% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 37% R, 33% C -16% R, -14% C 
Average rise or decline 34% -15% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 9% -1% 
Days to ultimate high or low 158 59 
How many change trend? 44% 32% 


Price rises from breakout E to G, just above the top of the pattern, before 
reversing. Notice that prior peak H poses overhead resistance to the advance. 
That resistance stops the upward move at G, and the stock eases lower after 
that as bearish selling pressure overwhelms bullish buying demand. 

You'll find that underlying support will stop a downward breakout and 
overhead resistance will halt an advance. It’s as if the roof pattern is just a place 
where the stock seeks shelter before resuming a trend that is too exhausted to 
last much longer. 


Statistics 


Table 53.2 shows general statistics for the roof pattern. 


816 Roof 


Number found. I catalogued 375 roofs in 283 stocks from 1991 to mid- 
2019 despite searching over 1,300 stocks. However, that included both bull 
and bear markets. The bear market totals were too few to be worth including 
in the tables that follow. Even bull market samples are scarce. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. The table shows the roof 
sorted by how they behave as reversals or continuations. If price entered 
the roof from the top and exits downward, then it’s a continuation pattern. 
A reversal in this case would have an upward breakout, reversing the down- 
ward inbound price trend. 

Most of the roofs with upward breakouts were continuation patterns 
(meaning an upward inbound trend, too). Downward breakouts acted as rever- 
sals of the upward trend most often. 

Reversal/continuation performance. The best performance came from 
patterns that acted as a reversal of the downtrend. Those patterns broke out 
upward and gained an average of 37%. Reversals with downward breakouts 
also outperformed continuation patterns. 

Average rise or decline. The average rise or decline ignores whether the 
roof acted as a reversal or continuation and just measures the rise or decline. 
The best performance came after an upward breakout. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Comparing the 34% average gain from 
roofs (upward breakouts) with the S&P over the same holding period shows 
that the general market gained just 9%. Downward breakouts retained more 
value, though, losing just 1% versus the roof’s 15%. 

The values for the index also suggest how the general market helped 
boost the performance of the individual stocks. 

Days to ultimate high or low. The average time to reach the ultimate 
high or low varies, depending on the breakout direction. The table shows it 
can take an average of 2 to 6 months before the trend ends. 

How many change trend? This line counts the number of roof patterns 
that see price move more than 20% from the breakout price. Upward breakouts 
are the best performing but still fall well short of what we see in other chart 
pattern types. I use this as a gauge for how well a pattern sees price trend (that 
was the objective, anyway). The higher the number, the better the pattern trends. 

Table 53.3 shows failure rates sorted by breakout direction. The failure 
rate gauges how far price moves after the breakout and before the trend reverses. 

For example, I found that 36 patterns or 26% of the total failed to 
rise more than 5% after an upward breakout. The 5% benchmark is what I 
call the breakeven failure rate. Just over half (56%) failed to see price rise 
more than 20%. 

The results show how treacherous trading a roof pattern can be. Failures 
climb rapidly for small moves. 

Table 53.4 shows breakout and post-breakout statistics for the roof pattern. 

Breakout direction. Most of the time (58%) the breakout will be down- 
ward from a roof. 


Table 53.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) 


Up Breakout 


Statistics 817 


Down Breakout 


5 (breakeven) 
10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

50 

75 

Over 75 


36 or 26% 
23 or 42% 
8 or 48% 
11 or 56% 
4 or 59% 

9 or 65% 

4 or 68% 
14 or 78% 
11 or 86% 
20 or 100% 


Table 53.4 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Up Breakout 


41 or 22% 
38 or 42% 
29 or 57% 
22 or 68% 
20 or 79% 
15 or 87% 
13 or 94% 
12 or 100% 
0 or 100% 
0 or 100% 


Down Breakout 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 
Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 
Average time to throwback/pullback ends 


Average rise/decline for patterns with throw- 
backs/pullbacks 


Average rise/decline for patterns without 
throwbacks/pullbacks 


Percentage price resumes trend 


Performance with breakout day gap 
Performance without breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


42% up 
L 32%, M 31%, 
H 36% 


60% 

4% in 6 days 
13 days 
26% 


46% 


42% 


42% 
33% 
$0.36 


58% down 
L-16%, M -17%, 
H -13% 


66% 

-6% in 6 days 
12 days 
-14% 


-18% 
60% 


-16% 
-15% 
$0.37 


Yearly position, performance. Sorting performance into the three 
yearly price ranges (low, middle, high), we see that the best performance comes 
from roofs within a third of the yearly high (upward breakouts). Those appear 
to be momentum plays: buy high, sell higher. Downward breakouts do best 
when the breakout is in the middle of the yearly range with performance from 
the low range just a percentage point behind. 


818 Roof 


Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks occur 60% of the time, and 
pullbacks happen a bit more frequently: 66%. By definition, price must leave 
the chart pattern, move a bit away (leaving whitespace behind), and return to 
or come close to the breakout price within 30 days. 

I found that price trends for 6 days, moving between 4% and 6% (depend- 
ing on breakout direction) before starting the return trip. The entire round- 
trip move takes 12 or 13 days on average. 

I sorted roof performance into two bins: those with throwbacks/pullbacks and 
those without. The results show that performance is better if a throwback or pull- 
back does not occur. It’s as if a throwback or pullback robs the stock of momentum, 
causing price to not move as far. This behavior is typical for chart patterns of all types. 

Price resumes trending between 42% and 60% of the time. I checked the 
statistics because I thought upward breakouts would show a higher percent- 
age than downward breakouts, but the numbers are correct. It suggests that 
roofs are most comfortable with downward breakouts (even when they break 
out upward. Confused? Price breaks out upward but would rather drop. That’s 
clear after a throwback sees price continue lower 58% of the time. That’s not 
a typo: 42% continue up, 58% drop). 

Gaps. Performance improves if a gap occurs on the breakout day. For 
example, a stock’s average rise with a breakout day gap from a roof pattern was 
42%. That result compares to price climbing just 33% without a breakout day 
gap. The average gap size varies, as the table shows. 

Because I measure performance using the opening price the day after a 
gap, you can trade the stock after the gap appears and partake of, hopefully, a 
bigger move. 

Table 53.5 tells if size matters, and for chart patterns it often does. 


Table 53.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 40% -18% 
Short pattern performance 29% -12% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 9.2% 8.7% 
Narrow pattern performance 27% -14% 
Wide pattern performance 41% -17% 
Median length 50 days 47 days 
Short and narrow performance 30% -13% 
Short and wide performance 26% -12% 
Tall and wide performance 47% -20% 


Tall and narrow performance 21% -16% 


Statistics 819 


Height. Tall patterns outperform short ones, which is typical behavior 
for most chart patterns. To determine this, I measured the height of each roof 
and divided it by the breakout price. If the result was higher than the median 
shown in the table, the roof was tall. 

Because the performance differences are startling, it might be a good idea 
to determine if your roof is short or tall before trading it. Avoid short patterns. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones on average, 
according to the results I saw. I measured the width from start to end in the 
pattern and compared it to the median width (shown in the table) for all roofs. 

Height and width combinations. Looking at the combination of height 
and width, we find that tall and wide roofs outperform in both breakout direc- 
tions. That makes sense because tall patterns outperform and wide patterns 
outperform, so the combination should also do well. That may sound obvious, 
but it’s not always the case with other types of chart patterns. 

Table 53.6 shows statistics related to roof volume. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression to determine whether volume 
was rising or falling from the start to end of the roof. Most of the time, you'll 
see volume trending downward. 

Rising/falling volume. Upward breakouts do best with a rising volume 
trend and downward breakouts show no significant performance difference. 

Breakout day volume. For the breakout day volume, I compared the 
breakout day’s volume with the prior 1-month average. Heavy volume on 
the breakout day propels a stock upward, but doesn’t do anything for down- 
ward breakouts. More samples might change the results. 

Table 53.7 shows how often price, after the breakout, hits the top, mid- 
dle, or bottom of the roof. I don’t show upward breakouts because I haven’t yet 
taught my computer how to handle trendline breakouts. 

For downward breakouts, I used the highest high between the breakout 
and the ultimate low and compared that to the roof’s price. 

For example, placing a stop at the top of a roof after a downward breakout 
would see the stop hit just 3% of the time on average. Often, this will happen 
during a pullback—within 2 weeks of the breakout. Placing a stop below the 
bottom of the pattern will trigger 65% of the time, but the loss will be much 
smaller than if the stop were placed in the middle or top of the roof. 


Table 53.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 66% down 72% down 
Rising volume trend performance 38% -15% 
Falling volume trend performance 32% -16% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 38% -15% 


Light breakout volume performance 29% -15% 


820 Roof 
Table 53.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Description Down Breakout 
Pattern top 3% 
Middle 14% 
Pattern bottom 65% 


Table 53.8 


Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 

1990s 30% -18% 

2000s 46% -9% 

2010s 31% -14% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 9% 6% 

2000s 5% 8% 

2010s 12% 7% 


Table 53.8 shows the performance of roof patterns over time for 
bull markets. 

Performance over time. I sorted the patterns into three bins by the date 
of the breakout. The best performance came from roof patterns with upward 
breakouts in the 2000s with gains averaging 46%. The worst performance was 
in the 1990s with gains of 30%, but the 31% rise during the 2010s was a 
close second. 

Downward breakouts showed the best performance in the 1990s (drops 
averaged 18%) with the 2000s showing drops averaging just 9%. 

Failures over time. I used the breakeven failure rate (5%) as the bench- 
mark and sorted the date of the breakout from a roof into one of the three 
“decade” bins. The decade (2000s) with the best performing roofs also had the 
fewest failures, at 5% (upward breakouts). For downward breakouts, the 1990s 
showed the best performance and the fewest failures, at 6%. 

Table 53.9 shows how busted patterns performed. Samples are few for 
all categories. With few samples, the results are likely to change. 

Busted patterns count. I found most of the busted patterns after a 
downward breakout, so let’s talk about those. 

A busted roof occurs when the breakout is downward (in this example) 
and price drops no more than 10%. Price reverses and closes above the top of 
the pattern, busting the downward breakout. 


Trading Tactics 821 


Table 53.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 45 or 32% 74 or 39% 
Single bust count 22 or 49% 52 or 70% 
Double bust count 15 or 33% 4 or 5% 
Triple+ bust count 8 or 18% 18 or 24% 
Performance for all busted patterns -15% 36% 
Single busted performance -25% 49% 
Non-busted performance -15% 34% 


I found 39% of the patterns I looked at busted in this manner (or went on 
to double or triple bust). 

Upward breakouts can bust, too, when price breaks out upward, reverses 
before rising too far, and closes below the bottom of the roof. The busting can 
continue for both breakout directions if the move is less than 10% before price 
reverses and trends to the other end of the roof. I stopped counting at three 
busts (which I call triple+, for three or more busts). 

Busted occurrence. Most of the busted patterns were single busts (70%), 
followed by triple+ busts (24%). The Glossary gives details on single, double, 
and triple+ busts, so check there if you’re confused. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Comparing the performance of 
all busted patterns (no matter how many busts occurred) with single busts, we 
find that single busted patterns outperformed in all cases, which is typical for 
chart patterns. 

For example, single busted patterns with downward breakouts reversed 
and gained 49% above the top of the roof. That compares to the combined 
results of all busted types (single, double, and triple+ busts), which gained an 
average of 36%. If you look at non-busted performance, they showed gains 
averaging 34%, below both the all-busted and single busted counts. 

Your eyes can slide across the table and compare the last three lines to 
determine if busted patterns are worth trading compared to their non-busted 
counterparts. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 53.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The table explains how to compute the measure 
rule for roofs. Like most patterns, compute the height of the pattern and either 
add it to the price of the top of the roof or subtract it from the bottom of the 


822 Roof 


Table 53.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the height of the roof from central peak to horizontal bottom. 
For upward breakouts, add the height to the price of the peak to get a 
target. For downward breakouts, subtract the height from the bottom 
of the pattern to get a target. The bottom portion of the table shows 
how often the measure rule works using various heights. 


Stop location Use Table 53.7 to help you decide where to place a stop. 


Avoid trading | With such poor performance, perhaps you should look elsewhere for a 
better performing chart pattern. 


Target Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 76% 81% 
Percentage reaching full height target 62% 63% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 41% 29% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 34% 14% 


roof to get a target. The lower portion of the table tells how often various 
heights work. 

As you would expect, the closer the computed target is to the breakout, 
the better than chance of reaching it. For example, using half the height of the 
roof after an upward breakout, price will reach or exceed the target 76% of the 
time. Using three times the height of the roof, price will reach the target, on 
average, about a third of the time (34%). 

Of course, if you don’t place a stop, the chances increase that if you hold 
onto the position long enough, it will reach the target you set. They key is to 
try to achieve the target as quickly as possible so you can find a new pattern, 
set a new target, and make lots of money trading. 

Once you have found a target, compute the distance from the roof to the 
target as a percentage of the current price and then consult Table 53.3. 

For example, if the distance to the target is 5 and the breakout price (cur- 
rent price) is 50, that’s a 10% move. Let’s also suppose it’s an upward breakout 
in a bull market. Table 53.3 says that 42% of roofs will fail to see price rise 
more than 10%. Even though the 10% move is small, the failure rate is high. 

Stop location. See Table 53.7 for the risk of using a stop. Other types of 
stops may work better, such as placing a stop below a minor low (for an upward 
breakout) or using a volatility stop (the stop location is based on how volatile 
the stock is). 

Low-priced stocks tend to be more volatile than high-priced ones, so 
stops should be located farther away for low-priced stocks. What are low- 
priced stocks? Answer: Those trading below $10 a share (or even $20 a share). 


Sample Trade 823 


Avoid trading. With such poor performance coming from roof patterns, 
perhaps you should not trade these at all, especially because they are rare. 
However, you may wish to experiment with them. Perhaps you can improve 
performance by seeing where in the price trend they work best and avoid set- 
ups where roofs have failed in the past. ’ve always found it valuable to search 
for the same pattern in the same stock or in stocks of the same industry. Study 
how they work and use that information as a buying guide. 


Sample Trade 


‘Ted is interested in the stock shown in Figure 53.4 because of the roof pat- 
tern, but also because the electric utility pays a dividend. Although he knows 
that capital gains may suffer if a company pays dividends, he likes to have the 
income associated with them. Dividend-paying stocks also tend to retain more 
of their price in down markets. 

“When the stock broke out upward at A, I bought at the open the next 
day at 52.24. Quick as a bunny, I set a stop a penny below the bottom of the 
chart pattern [51.34 (B)].” 

The stock climbed but soon rounded over and returned to the breakout 
price. “That’s a throwback,” he said and pointed to C. Fortunately, the stock 
only dropped to 51.81, which was above his stop price. 

He calculated the height of the pattern from the peak at D (53.40) to the 
low at B (51.35) for a height of 2.05. That gave a target of 53.40 + 2.05 or 55.45. 


Ameren (AEE) 


Dividend Me . _58 

i tc W 57 

i ta’ ‘i ay" Dividend \e 56 

4 Ay i yy j - $5 


' Dividend \W — 54 
F 


ve | ws 


| -47 


16 Dec Jan17 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan18 — 


Figure 53.4 This roof leads to a big gain with dividends included. 


824 Roof 


The stock reached the target at E, peaking at 55.51. Did he sell there? 
“No. If this were a swing trade, I’d have placed a limit order to sell at the 
target price, but in this case, I wanted to hold onto the stock longer to collect 
dividends.” 

Here’s what he did. Based on the height of the roof, he found the next 
target: 55.45 + 2.05 or 57.50. That became the new target. He raised the stop- 
loss order to the top of the pattern, D, at 53.40. 

Price meandered higher and came close to stopping him out at F when 
the stock bottomed at 53.54. At G, the stock exceeded his new price target of 
57.50 when it peaked at 57.65. 

He set a new target of 57.50 + 2.05 or 59.55 with a new stop at 55.45 (the 
price of the first target). 

Price reached that target at H. He raised the stop to the second target or 
57.50 and calculated a higher target of 61.60 using the same approach. 

At I, price bottomed at 57.56, missing his stop again. Price moved higher 
and tagged his target at J. Once more he raised his target another 2.05 to 63.65 
and stop to 59.55. The stock cooperated and reached his target at K. 

He set a new target of 65.70 and a stop of 61.60. This time, though, the 
stock failed to reach his new target. Instead, the stock dropped to his stop 
order and filled at 61.60. 

He bought the stock at 52.24 and sold it at 61.60 for $9.36 per share gain 
plus three dividend payments of 46 cents each, for a total of $10.74 per share 
or Just over 20%. 


34 


Roof, Inverted 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Has a horizontal or near-horizontal top with a V-shaped bottom, making 
the pattern look like the bottom half of a diamond. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish continuation 


Performance rank 37 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 23% 
Average rise 34% 
Volume trend Downward 
‘Throwbacks 58% 
Percentage meeting 65% 


price target 


See also Head-and-shoulders bottom, complex head-and- 


shoulders bottom 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish reversal 


Performance rank 26 out of 36 
Breakeven failure rate 25% 
Average drop 14% 
Volume trend Downward 
Pullbacks 64% 
Percentage meeting price target 47% 


825 


826 Roof, Inverted 


After discovering the roof pattern in 2005, I guessed that there must be an 
inverted version, too, so I went hunting and uncovered this pattern. 

The rank shown in the above Results Snapshot says that I wasted my 
time searching for the inverted roof. The pattern doesn’t perform well at all. 
Upward breakouts show a tiny 34% rise (compared to a 42% average rise for 
other chart patterns) paired with a failure rate (23% versus a typical 15% rate 
for other chart patterns). 

Downward breakouts show a massive 25.1% failing to see price drop 
more than 5% after the breakout, but that’s close to the 24.7% average for all 
patterns with downward breakouts. Over a third of the patterns will bust their 
breakouts, too. We’ll see that later. 

Are there any redeeming qualities for the inverted roof? Yes. It looks 
pretty. The pattern can act like a diamond top, where price makes a strong 
push upward and then forms the inverted roof. A downward breakout from the 
inverted roof means price could retrace most of the rise. I discuss this scenario 
in the Sample Trade. 

Let’s take a tour and look at a few examples. 


Tour 


Figure 54.1 shows an example of an inverted roof on the daily chart. Price 
trends downward (in this example) leading to the start of the inverted roof 
that appears at A. Price bounces between a horizontal (or nearly so) top trend- 
line and a V-shaped bottom multiple times. Price should touch each trendline 


Advanced Energy (AEIS) 


ay =75 
vy 238 
fe I tag sy sald =6¢ 
hi 1 Ay | E Fl ha A 4 =6 

a ‘Cu se a 58 

- =34 


a z 
Maa a 
i Wwe May 


18 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 54.1 This inverted roof occurs in a downtrend and has a down- 
ward breakout. 


Identification Guidelines 827 


several times and cross the pattern from top to bottom, filling the space with 
price movement. 

This inverted roof has a downward breakout, which occurs at B, when 
price closes outside of the trendline boundary. The breakout can be in any 
direction and it splits about evenly between up and down. Price rises to C and 
closes above the top of the pattern, which busts the downward breakout. Price 
tumbles and double busts the pattern. 

My eyes say I’m wrong, but linear regression says volume trends upward 
from pattern start to end. I show that at D. It’s probably due to the high spike 
near the end of the pattern. 

If you look closely at the inverted roof, you might see left and right shoul- 
der bottoms, suggesting this is really a head-and-shoulders bottom. However, 
this inverted roof breaks out downward, so it’s not a head-and-shoulders bot- 
tom (by definition, because they always breakout upward). 

Many inverted roofs have price trending upward into the start of the pat- 
tern, so any pattern forming would be a top and not a bottom. Again, that’s by 
definition. Coupled with a horizontal “neckline” (top) and you have the mak- 
ing of an inverted roof like that shown. 

Let’s discuss the guidelines for finding inverted roofs. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 54.1 shows the identification guidelines, and refer to Figure 54.2 as 
another example of an inverted roof at A. 

Appearance. Look for price that has a flat top and V-shaped bottom. The 
top need not be horizontal, but it should be close. The bottom of the pattern 
should form a V, with price staying within two trendlines, but be flexible. 


Table 54.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic | Discussion 
Appearance Has a horizontal or near-horizontal top with a V-shaped bottom, making 


the pattern look like the bottom half of a diamond. 


Price trend Often (67% of the time) the inbound price trend will be upward. 
A downward price trend with an upward breakout may be a head- 
and-shoulders bottom. 


Symmetrical If you split the pattern vertically down the center, the two halves should 
appear symmetrical, but be flexible. Price should near or touch the 
top line several times. 


Volume Trends downward the majority of the time. 


Breakout The breakout can be in any direction. A close outside the pattern 
direction boundary signals a breakout. 


828 Roof, Inverted 


You will want to avoid an inverted roof that is really a head-and-shoulders 
bottom (or complex head-and-shoulders bottom). That means an inverted roof 
pattern should see price enter the pattern from the bottom, exit downward, or 
have no discernable shoulders (one on each side of the divot in the pattern). 
Again, be flexible. If you accidentally find a head-and-shoulders instead of an 
inverted roof, you may be rewarded with better performance. 

Price trend. The inbound price trend can be either up or down, but leans 
heavily toward being upward. Figure 54.2 shows an upward price trend leading 
to the start of the inverted roof. Figure 54.1 shows a downward inbound trend. 
If the price trend is downward, check for a left and right shoulder followed by 
an upward breakout. If you find all of that, then it’s a head-and-shoulders bot- 
tom and not an inverted roof. 

For upward inbound price trends, don’t worry about searching for shoul- 
ders. Even if it has them, it’s not a head-and-shoulders bottom. 

Symmetrical. The two halves of the V-shape should be similar in size 
and shape. It should /ook like the bottom half of a diamond. Price should touch 
the trendlines multiple times, but often this is a function of how you draw the 
trendlines. 

Volume. This (Figure 54.2) inverted roof has upward trending volume, 
and that is unusual. Most of the time (65% to 70%) volume will trend down- 
ward from the start of the pattern to the day before the breakout. 

Breakout direction. There is no defined breakout direction for the 
inverted roof, meaning the breakout can be in any direction. In fact, it’s about 
random, with 51% favoring the upward direction. 


Allstate Corp (ALL) 


feel 9 Min: 108 


ln Man hee 
, se all f ‘ - 
A ui 
yo" Us AB DL ae! a 
ria <a a Oy Lael -96 
\ \) il Pes: " 32 
4) I - 90 
Wye = 
| i _ 84 


18 Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb = Mar Apr May = Jun — jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 54.2 Price enters this inverted roof from the bottom and exits out the top, 
acting as a continuation pattern. 


Focus on Failures 829 


When price closes above the horizontal top or below the lower right trend- 
line, then that’s the breakout day. Figure 54.1 shows a downward breakout 
(at B), and Figure 54.2 has an upward one (B). 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 54.3 shows an example of a failed inverted roof. The inverted roof is at 
A. Price trends upward going into the pattern and exits out the top at B. That 
means this pattern acted as a continuation of the prevailing upward price trend. 

I checked the news for the move at B, and the company has this headline 
on their website: “Ameren Missouri to bring customers solar energy at night.” 
My first thought was they'd have a bunch of people holding lit candles in front 
of their solar panels and hope clouds wouldn’t obscure the moon. 

The second thought was more high tech: They’d use spotlights on the 
solar panels, capitalizing on the surplus generating capacity at night. Rather, 
this is about battery storage. I give them credit for the catchy headline. 

‘Two days after breaking out upward at B, the stock reversed. This behav- 
ior is an example of a throwback, where price returns to (or nears) the breakout 
price. In this example, though, the stock continues lower, dropping all the way 
to C. The day after bottoming at C, the company announced the pricing of 
“senior notes offering due 2024.” Maybe that news sent the stock back up. 

If you had bought this stock because of the upward breakout and placed 
a stop-loss order a penny or two below the bottom of the inverted roof, you’d 
have been stopped out for a loss at C. Worse, the stock would have rubbed your 
nose in it when price shot back up to D. 


Ameren (AEE) D 
Mn : -80 
i - 
i lh, aah! hi ith ah i i a fit fi 
r i My ‘ne ‘yj iy i 1 =i 
* A bel * ssc a 
| es \ -73 


ih 
Awe Pe 1 


uly 


mm I -69 
4 w 
Ae “s 


a - 66 


19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 54.3 This inverted roof fails to see a sustained upward price trend. 


830 Roof, Inverted 


This inverted roof is not an example of a busted pattern because price 
didn’t close below the bottom of the pattern, although it was close at C. There’s 
still time to bust it, however, because price hasn’t climbed more than 10% 
above the top of the pattern yet. [A check of the pattern in July 2020 shows 
it never did bust. The closing price tied the low in early December 2019 and 
then soared to over 87 before Covid-19 virus fears chopped the stock down to 
58 in a few weeks]. 

My sense of inverted roof pattern failures is that many breakouts look like 
this corkscrew. There is no trend direction. Price just wobbles up and down, 
causing traders headaches before a trend appears. 


Statistics 


Table 54.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. The inverted roof pattern is rare. I searched and found 
them in 378 stocks from July 1991 to October 2019. Not all stocks covered the 
entire range. There were only 59 bear market patterns, too few to be worth 
reporting on. They would just confuse the issue with facts. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Upward breakouts are 
most often continuations of the upward price trend. Downward breakouts 
frequently act as reversals. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Sorting performance by reversal 
or continuation behavior, upward breakouts do slightly better if the pattern 
acts as a reversal. Downward breakouts don’t show a compelling preference. 

Average rise or decline. Both breakout directions show poor perfor- 
mance, so make sure you have a compelling reason for trading this chart pattern. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. As bad as the performance of the 
inverted roof is, it still beats the performance of the S&P 500 index. I used the 
same hold time from the breakout to the ultimate high or low of the inverted 
roof and measured the move for both the roof and index. 


Table 54.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 242 235 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 37% R, 63% C 71% R, 29% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 36% R, 33% C -14% R, -15% C 
Average rise or decline 34% -14% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 11% -2% 
Days to ultimate high or low 220 46 


How many change trend? 47% 25% 


Statistics 831 


Days to ultimate high or low. Upward breakouts take an usually long 
time (about 7 months) to rise 34%. The drop (for downward breakouts) is twice 
as fast as the rise. That’s the kind of velocity difference we’ve seen for other chart 
patterns, too. You can lose money faster than you can make it trading stocks. 

How many change trend? As good as the 47% number appears for 
upward breakouts, it’s below the 55% average for other chart pattern types 
(including this one). In other words, 47% of the patterns will see price rise 
more than 20% after a breakout. The higher the number the harder you 
should party. 

Table 54.3 shows cumulative failure rates for the inverted roof. How 
many inverted roof patterns fail to see price rise more than 5% after the break- 
out? Answer: 56 or 23%. That’s huge. Over a third will fail to rise more than 
10%. It’s even worse for downward breakouts where almost half will fail to see 
price drop more than 10%. 

Table 54.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The inverted roof pattern doesn’t show a prefer- 
ence for a breakout direction. 

Yearly position, performance. I mapped where in the yearly price trend 
the breakout from an inverted roof occurred and overlaid performance. 

Upward breakouts tend to do better if the breakout is within a third of 
the yearly low. Avoid the middle third of the yearly high-low price range for 
downward breakouts. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. More than half of inverted roofs show 
throwbacks or pullbacks. They happen quickly, within a week or so of the 
breakout, and price returns to the breakout price in 11 to 14 days. 

Performance improves if a throwback or pullback does mot occur. I think 
the reason for that is one of momentum. If a throwback does not happen, price 
can continue rising without anything slowing it down. 


Table 54.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 56 or 23% 59 or 25% 
10 32 or 36% 49 or 46% 
15 27 or 48% 42 or 64% 
20 15 or 54% 27 or 75% 
25 9 or 57% 19 or 83% 
30 13 or 63% 16 or 90% 
35 10 or 67% 9 or 94% 
50 27 or 78% 11 or 99% 
75 27 or 89% 3 or 100% 


Over 75 26 or 100% 0 or 100% 


832 Roof, Inverted 


Table 54.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 51% up 49% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L 39%, M 36%, L-15%, M-12%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H 32% H -15% 
Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 58% 64% 
Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 5% in 5 days -7% in 8 days 
Average time to throwback/pullback ends 11 days 14 days 
Average rise/decline for patterns with 30% -11% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 
Average rise/decline for patterns without 39% -19% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 60% 44% 
Performance with breakout day gap 48% -14% 
Performance without breakout day gap 32% -14% 
Average gap size $0.74 $0.81 


The same can be said for price dropping after pullbacks. If a pullback 
occurs, it blunts the downward move. The energy that could have been used to 
power the stock into the ground begins a fight with the bulls as they push price 
higher during the pullback. After the pullback is over, there are fewer bears left 
alive to resume the push lower, so price doesn’t drop as far as it would have if 
a pullback was absent. 

Upward breakouts see price resume the breakout direction after a throw- 
back completes, but not pullbacks. They tend to see price rise after a pullback 
ends (that is, 44% continue lower but 56% continue higher). 

Gaps. Upward breakouts do best if a gap occurs on the breakout day. 
That’s typical for many chart patterns. Downward breakouts show no perfor- 
mance difference. 

Table 54.5 shows size statistics for the inverted roof. 

Height. Upward breakouts show no performance difference, but the 
median (not shown) favors tall patterns. Downward breakouts also favor tall 
patterns. In most chart pattern types, a tall pattern beats a short one on aver- 
age. In fact, height is often the best indicator of future performance. 

Width. Patterns wider than the median 45 days outperform (upward 
breakouts), but downward breakouts with patterns narrower than 43 days 
show marginally better performance. I like to see both breakout directions 
agree. Maybe one direction leans democratic and the other leans republican. 


Statistics 833 


Table 54.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 34% -16% 
Short pattern performance 34% -12% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 8.7% 9.1% 
Narrow pattern performance 31% -15% 
Wide pattern performance 36% -13% 
Median width 45 days 43 days 
Short and narrow performance 32% -13% 
Short and wide performance 37% -10% 
Tall and wide performance 36% -16% 
Tall and narrow performance 29% -17% 
Table 54.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 65% down 70% down 
Rising volume trend performance 30% -14% 
Falling volume trend performance 36% -14% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 34% -15% 
Light breakout volume performance 33% -13% 


Height and width combinations. The table shows performance for 
the four combinations of height and width. If you have an upward breakout, 
avoid narrow patterns. Downward breakouts underperform if the pattern is 
short and wide. 

The numbers are averages, so expect your results to vary, but my guess 
is if you trade inverted roofs often enough, you'll see this type of performance 
(unless you blow out your account, of course). 

Table 54.6 shows volume statistics. 

Volume trend. The majority of the time, volume trends downward. 
I measured this by finding the slope of the volume line using linear regression. 

Rising/Falling volume. A falling volume trend suggests better perfor- 
mance after upward breakouts, but has no effect after downward breakouts. 

Breakout day volume. The reverse is true for breakout day volume. 
There’s no significant performance difference after upward breakouts with 


834 Roof, Inverted 


heavy volume, but downward breakouts do slightly better when volume is 
above average. 

Table 54.7 shows results for upward breakouts only. That’s because I 
haven’t figured out how to tell my computer to calculate it for patterns when a 
breakout pierces a trendline. 

I measured the dip on the way to the ultimate high (after the breakout) 
and compared those valleys to locations in the pattern. The table gives you an 
idea of how often price will stop out a trade when placed at three locations. 

For example, placing a stop-loss order at the top of the inverted roof will 
stop out a trade 72% of the time after an upward breakout. Place the stop at 
the bottom and you'll be protected 93% of the time (that is, the stop will hit 
7% of the time). 

Table 54.8 shows how this pattern has behaved over the last three dec- 
ades using the magic of numbers. 

Performance over time. The best performance for upward breakouts 
happened in the 2010s. Downward breakouts did best in the 1990s. 

I still find it odd examining performance statistics for patterns that hadn’t 
been discovered yet (recall, I discovered the inverted roof in 2005). Still, it’s 
worth checking how they behaved back then after a diligent search for patterns 
in the 1990s and even the 2000s. 

Failures over time. Failures are high for this pattern, as I’ve already dis- 
cussed. Downward breakouts in the 2000s were especially brutal with 30% 


Table 54.7 
How Often Stops Hit 

Description Up Breakout 
Pattern high 72% 
Pattern middle 25% 
Pattern low 7% 

Table 54.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 29% -17% 
2000s 29% -12% 
2010s 43% -13% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 16% 18% 
2000s 26% 30% 


2010s 26% 27% 


Trading Tactics 835 


Table 54.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 84 or 35% 85 or 36% 
Single bust count 40 or 48% 58 or 68% 
Double bust count 30 or 36% 5 or 6% 
Triple+ bust count 14 or 17% 22 or 26% 
Performance for all busted patterns -11% 44% 
Single busted performance -18% 61% 
Non-busted performance -14% 34% 


failing to see price drop more than 5%. I don’t include bear markets in the 
results. My guess is that the technology tide of the late 1990s and early 2000s 
was strong enough to lift all boats, even those patterns with downward break- 
outs, making downward breakouts fail more often. 

Table 54.9 shows busted pattern statistics. 

Busted patterns count. Inverted roofs bust frequently, as if they can’t 
make up their mind in which direction price should trend. 

Busted occurrence. The table shows how often single, double, and three 
or more busts (triple+) occur (as a percentage of those that bust). Most of the 
inverted roofs will single bust, but the number seems low when compared to 
other chart pattern types. That’s important because a single busted pattern 
outperforms the non-busted variety. 

I like to see single busted counts of 75% or so. That way, if I decide to 
trade a busted pattern, I can assume it’ll single bust. It might not, but that’s the 
way to play the odds. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared the performance of 
busted and non-busted patterns. If you believe an inverted roof will single 
bust, then buy one with a busted downward breakout. The average gain is a 
tasty 61%. Of course, that’s for 58 single busted patterns traded perfectly, so 
keep that in mind. If you get in late and don’t sell on time, then your wife may 
complain when the bills are marked past due. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 54.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to help gauge how far price 
may move after the pattern ends. Calculate the height of the pattern and either 
add it to or subtract it from the breakout price to get a target. The bottom por- 
tion of the table shows how often price reaches the target. Pll give an example 
in the Sample Trade on how to use the measure rule. 


836 Roof, Inverted 


Table 54.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Measure the height of the pattern from the horizontal line on top to 
the bottom of the V. For upward breakouts, add the height to the 
breakout price (the top of the pattern). For downward breakouts, sub- 
tract the height from the breakout price (where price closes outside 
the right trendline). The result is the target price. Ignore results at or 
below zero. Larger percentage moves will be unlikely. The bottom 
portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Stop location Place a stop at the location of your choice, using the results in 
Table 54.7 as guidance. 
Busted trade If you find a pattern with a busted downward breakout, then consider 
buying the stock and riding the recovery. See Table 54.9 for help. 
Quick If price makes a steep move leading to the start of the inverted roof and 
rise, decline price breaks out downward, in some cases, price may return to just 


above the launch price. The Sample Trade discusses an example. 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 79% 63% 
Percentage reaching full height target 65% 47% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 49% 23% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 37% 13% 


Stop location. Use Table 54.7 to help determine where to place a stop- 
loss order. This is most important for swing traders or other short-term trad- 
ers and less important for investors and people who buy-and-hold. 

Be sure to determine if you can live with a loss given the stop location. 
Adjust the stop as necessary to minimize the size of a potential loss and the 
probability of being stopped out. 

Busted trade. Busted patterns can be a profitable endeavor if traded 
properly. They can outperform their non-busted brothers and sisters. See 
Table 54.9 for guidance. 

Quick rise, decline. The Sample Trade describes this scenario. It’s rare 
that this happens, but it does happen. You'll see this not only in roof patterns 
but diamonds and other chart patterns as well. 

There’s an old saying that goes, “I may be paranoid, but how do you 
know they’re not after me?” By that, I mean just because price makes a 
straight-line run up to a stock you own and it shows a reversal pattern is 
no reason to believe a straight-line run back down will follow a downward 
breakout. It might, but I’ve been burned selling too soon, anticipating an 
event that rarely happens. 


Sample Trade 837 


Sample Trade 


Figure 54.4 shows what a quick rise, quick decline looks like. I don’t discuss a 
sample trade, but rather something that may happen to you. 

The inverted roof is at A. Let’s discuss the measure rule first. The top 
of the pattern is at 83.26 and the bottom is at 77.01 for a height of 6.25. The 
breakout price is the price at which the stock crosses the trendline boundary. 
In this example, that’s 81.53. 

If a breakout has not occurred yet, then use the top of the pattern (for an 
upward breakout) or guess where it might pierce the pattern for a downward 
breakout. Accuracy isn’t important because the measure rule gives a number 
that will often be inaccurate anyway. However, it’s worth running the calcula- 
tion if only to pat me on the back for providing the statistics on how often 
price will reach the measure rule target. 

For upward breakouts, add the height to the breakout price. In this exam- 
ple, that would be 6.25 + 83.26 or 89.51. That uses the full height. Table 54.10 
says price will reach the target 65% of the time on average. If you want a 
closer target, divide the height in half and add it to the breakout price. The 
stock should reach the target 79% of the time, if you trade it often enough and 
well enough. 

For downward breakouts, subtract the height from the breakout price. 
In this case, that’s 81.53 — 6.25 or 75.28. Price will reach the target just 47% of 
the time. If you wish to use a different height, I show the hit rate for various 
multiples of height in the table. 


Alaska Air Group, Inc (ALK) 


; : 
; = 84 
1 tM yy : 


lye 


15 Nov Dec Jan 16 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 54.4 This chart shows how a stock can return to the launch price. 


838 Roof, Inverted 


Let’s put Table 54.3 to use. In this example, price is breaking out down- 
ward in a bull market. The potential drop is 6.25, and at the breakout price, 
that’s a projected decline of 8%. Let’s round that up to 10%. Table 54.3 shows 
that 46% of the roofs will fail to see price drop more than 10%. Because we 
rounded up from 8%, the failure rate will be less than 46%, but wow. It’s still 
going to be huge. 

Let’s return to our regularly scheduled program ... 

Look at the chart again. The launch price is at B (bottom of the chart, 
in February). The launch price is where the straight-line uptrend leading to 
the inverted roof begins. It’s been my experience that on the way down, price 
will remain slightly above the launch price (if it can get down that far). So 
you'll want to trade expecting the stock won’t make it all the way down to the 
price of B. 

In this example, price breaks out downward from the chart pattern at C. 
It drops in a straight-line run down to E where it moves sideways. Notice that 
the stock blew through the calculated target of 75.28 on the way down. The 
target is just an arbitrary number; the stock doesn’t know to turn there. 

If I had shorted the stock, I’'d be nervous that the stock would reverse 
when it went horizontal. I’d be covering that short, especially when price made 
a strong push upward for a week prior to the breakout from the circle (peaking 
3 days before candle D). 

The stock broke out downward from the consolidation region at D and 
continued lower, bottoming well below the launch price. As I said, that’s unu- 
sual both in the velocity of the decline (a straight-line run down) and how far 
price dropped. 

Usually the decline is more sedate, with price pausing often on the way 
down. Many times it doesn’t get close to B. 

If we ignore the congestion region at E, I’d be covering my short at D (in 
the middle of that price bar), which is slightly above the low at B. 

Why did the stock drop? Answer: Earnings were announced at C. Oh! So 
that’s the cause! 

Look at the chart one last time. This is what an earnings announcement 
looks like when the market /ates the results. The market sliced 33% from the 
value of the stock, as measured from the close before the announcement to the 
June low. If you could time an entry near the June low, there was money to be 
made when the stock bounced going into the July earnings announcement. 

This chart also shows what a dead-cat bounce event pattern looks like. 
I try to avoid buying a stock within 6 months of a dead-cat because of the 
probability of another one happening at months 3 and 6 (both announcements 
of earnings). Problems that often cause dead-cats take more than one or two 
quarters to fix. 


35 


Rounding Bottoms 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: A long saucer-like concave price turn. 


Upward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 


Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish continuation Intermediate-term 
bullish continuation 


Performance rank 7 out of 39 1 (best) out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 4% 6% 
Average rise 48% 37% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Throwbacks 64% 67% 
Percentage meeting 65% 51% 
price target 
Synonym Rounding turns, saucers 
See also Bump-and-run reversal bottoms; cup-with-handle; 


head-and-shoulders bottoms, complex; scallops 
(ascending and descending) 


Rounding bottoms, rounding turns, and saucers are synonyms for the same 
chart pattern. Rounding bottoms have a large average rise, so they perform 
very well. The performance rank of 1 and 7, where 1 is best, emphasizes the 
point. In bear markets, rounding bottoms are the best performing chart pattern. 


839 


840 Rounding Bottoms 


That finding surprised me, so I added a bunch more chart patterns, and 
the results hardly budged. So, yes, rounding bottoms blow the doors off your 
Datsun (remember those?). 

The rank for failure rates (not shown in the Results Snapshot) put both 
bull and bear markets in first and second place (respectively, with fewest 
failures) compared to all other chart patterns. 

Because the pattern can be tall—like a bowl with high sides instead of 
a shallow saucer—the measure rule price target (“Percentage meeting price 
target” in the Results Snapshot) may be hard to reach. Just over half to two- 
thirds of the rounding bottoms hit their targets. 

Let’s take a tour of this handsome charmer. 


Tour 


Figure 55.1 shows an example of a rounding bottom on a daily scale. I would 
not call it a good example because the bottom is too irregular, but it’s fair to say 
many turns look like this (or worse). 

In mid-May there is an out-of-pattern downward price decline that 
ends with price quickly rebounding. In late June price jumps up, then fades 
back down. The June rise is not uncommon, so do not get too excited when it 
happens in a stock you own (often you see price climb rapidly just after midway 
along the bottom, but it settles back down in several weeks. The June rise is an 
example of this, but it occurs later than usual). 


Canandaigua Brands Inc A (Beverage (Alcoholic), NASDAQ, CBRNA) 
— 35 


hi Hh Pl in, 


Rounding Bottom 
h - 31 


hn 


is - 30 
¥ i! mt 


nyt | : 
a i " : 2 


. 
iy Ad - 


| ew -23 


-22 


ta allah Auda 


Jan 94 


lh \ Lu 


he" h 


Figure 55.1. A rounding bottom on the daily scale. The bottom takes a brief dip 
in mid-May and a quick rise in late June. 


Identification Guidelines 841 


Volume takes on the appearance of being rounded if you ignore the 
annoying spikes in the center. 

A rounding bottom marks the imbalance between buying demand and 
selling pressure. Through the first part of the rounded turn, sellers have the 
upper hand when they drive price lower. Eventually, the bullish and bearish 
forces come into balance and the stock bottoms and moves horizontally. Later 
still, buying demand picks up and the stock inches upward. The climb is not 
always a smooth one. Sometimes, buying demand sends the stock skyrocket- 
ing, but in a month or so price heads back down and planes out slightly above 
where it left off. Then the stock resumes its climb. When the stock reaches the 
old high, selling pressure usually drives price lower, forming a handle. Price 
recovers, breaks through the old high, and sends the stock upward. 


Identification Guidelines 


As chart patterns go, rounding bottoms are easy to identify. Table 55.1 lists 
guidelines for their identification. 

Appearance. The best looking patterns appear like bowls or saucers, a 
gently rounded and concave turn. In reality, though, the bottom is often irreg- 
ularly shaped. The weekly scale tends to show rounded turns better than the 
daily charts. You might want to switch your chart to the arithmetic scale (from 
a log scale) and see if that makes a rounded turn appear. On the log scale, some 
rounded turns might look V-shaped. 

Scale. Since rounding bottoms are often quite long (in this study, the 
longest is 4 1/2 years), I usually use the weekly scale to make identification 
easy. However, and this is an important point, the statistics in this chapter use 
daily price data even though the pattern may be years long. That’s because 
I wanted to compare performance of these patterns with other chart pattern 
types on the same scale. 


Table 55.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance The price trend forms a concave bowl, usually over many months, 


and usually after an upward price trend. Connect the weekly low 
prices to visually construct a saucer or bowl shape in your mind. 

Scale Use the weekly scale to identify these behemoths, although the daily 
scale also works well. 

Volume The volume trend sometimes mimics the price trend by appearing 
as a bowl shape but more often is dome shaped. 

Breakout direction, The breakout is upward, and it occurs when price closes above the 

confirmation price of the /eft rim. See text. If price breaks out downward, then 

you don’t have a rounded bottom. 


842 Rounding Bottoms 


Best Buy Co (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, BBY) 


My 


It 
ron 1 


vores 


Rounding Bottom 


ft i| 
' 


MU faye! 


t i! 
lt 


ollitittttt 


97 AS OND92 FMAMYJ | A SOND 93FEFMA MJ J AS 


Figure 55.2 This chart is a good example of a rounding bottom on the 
weekly scale. 


Consider Figure 55.2, shown on the weekly scale. The most recent up 
leg of the climb to the chart pattern began in late December 1991 on very 
high volume. Price climbed 235% in about 3 months, and then the stock eased 
over. The decline was not a quick straight-down affair. Rather, the stock moved 
lower on its way to 4.25 by curving around and flattening out. 

Once price reached the low in the rounding bottom, it moved horizon- 
tally for several weeks before beginning an accelerated climb. On the right side 
of the pattern, price reached the level of the left saucer rim but did not pause. 
It kept climbing until reaching 13 and then 16 before backing down to 11 
(August 1993). I consider the end of the pattern to be when the stock reaches 
the price level of the left side (the left lip). 

A rounding bottom does not require a handle, which is a price consoli- 
dation area that commonly forms immediately after the right saucer rim, but 
most times you will see one. A pause in the upward move is typical behavior 
when price reaches an old high (the site of the left lip). The rise falters as 
tepid demand or excessive selling pushes price lower; then, the two highs act 
as a resistance zone. Sometimes, price makes several attempts before pushing 
through resistance and moving higher; sometimes, price just gives up and rolls 
back downhill. 

Volume. The volume trend occasionally echoes the price trend by 
rounding downward, too. You can see this in Figure 55.2, although it is not as 
pronounced as it sometimes is. However, a dome shape predominates (not that 
it matters). 


Focus on Failures 843 


Breakout direction, confirmation. The breakout is upward when price 
closes above the top of the left rim (if it has one). If price closes below the bot- 
tom of the chart pattern (before first closing above the left rim), then you don’t 
have a valid rounding bottom. 

If the rounding bottom doesn’t have a left rim, then use a close above the 
right rim as the confirmation or breakout price. 


Focus on Failures 


Although rounding bottoms have low failure rates, they occasionally fail, and 
Figure 55.3 shows an example of one. This rounding bottom (points A and B) 
occurs in a downward price trend, but the bottom is not as smooth (rounded 
looking) as I like to see. The start of the pattern, A, is not well defined because 
the pause lasts just a few days. The corresponding end, B, marks the beginning 
of a small handle attached to the rounding bottom. 

Price climbs high enough to surpass peak A, staging an upward breakout 
(at B), but the rise soon falters. Peaks and valleys over the 7 or 8 months lead- 
ing to the start of the rounding bottom presented just too much overhead 
resistance (shown by the horizontal line across the chart). The stock tried to 
pierce it but failed and dropped, eventually reaching a low of 8.56 (not shown). 


National Semiconductor Corp (Semiconductor, NYSE, NSM) 


\ 


| | | i - 
} | W Mt 1 ih | 


bk 


I A B 
i hy / hy 


99 Dec JanO0O Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 55.3. Rounding bottom that acts as a short-term reversal of the trend. 


844 Rounding Bottoms 


These types of situations are easy to diagnose. Before trading, always look 
for overhead resistance and underlying support. Knowing when price is likely 
to stop will give you valuable information. It may be that the trade will not be 
profitable enough if it hits a wall of resistance. The loss as price tumbles to the 
support zone may be too large to risk a trade. If the trade does not look right 
or if the potential reward does not compensate for the risk of loss, then look 
for a more promising trade. Good trades (and patterns) are worth waiting for. 


Statistics 


Table 55.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I used daily price data for the rounding bottoms and 
found 1,206 of them in 629 stocks with the first in July 1991 and the most 
recent in June 2020. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some no 
longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. I struggled with this row 
and the next one. If the pattern is a bottom, then price enters the rounding bot- 
tom from the top by definition. Because price exits the pattern in an upward 
breakout, then all rounding bottoms act as reversals. 

However, I see chart after chart where price rises into the left rim of a 
rounding turn. So I present a breakdown of how often price rises or drops into 
the rounding bottom (meaning it acts as a reversal or continuation pattern). 
Most rounding bottoms act as continuation patterns. 

Reversal/continuation performance. In bull markets, continuations 
perform slightly better than reversals. In bear markets, the numbers are further 
apart, with the performance edge going to reversals. 

Average rise. In both markets, the average rise is exceptional even though 
the bear market number is just 37%. That still puts it in first place for perfor- 
mance among all other bear market, up breakout patterns (all 20 of them). 


Table 55.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 
Reversal, continuation performance 


Average rise 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change 
Days to ultimate high 


How many change trend? 


990 
33% R, 67% C 
47% R, 48% C 
48% 
13% 
278 
66% 


216 

41% R, 59% C 
40% R, 35% C 
37% 

-3% 

111 

60% 


Statistics 845 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change. If a rising tide (general market) lifts all 
boats (stocks), then it helps bull market results. In bear markets, a market drop 
of 3% holds down the average rise for the chart pattern. 

Days to ultimate high. Notice how it takes more than twice as long to 
reach the ultimate high in bull markets as in bear ones. If you do the math, 
you will find that the rise in bear markets is steeper than in bull markets. How 
steep? Price climbs 90% faster in bear markets than in bull markets. To check 
this, I borrowed a radar gun from the police. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many rounding 
bottoms see price climb more than 20% after the breakout. I consider values 
above 50% to be terrific, so ’m happy to report that I’m, well, happy. 

Table 55.3 shows failure rates. They start small but quickly climb with 
the bull market showing slightly better results (fewer failures). That observa- 
tion is no surprise because upward breakouts in bear markets is a countertrend 
move, which is like swimming against the current. 

Half the patterns in bull markets rise less than 35% (it’s closer to 30%). 
That is a good showing compared to other chart pattern types. For bear mar- 
kets, half the patterns rise less than 25%. 

Notice how the failure rate climbs for small changes in the maximum 
price rise. For example, in bear markets, the failure rate more than triples to 
20% from 6% for moves of 5% to 10%. The 15% maximum price rise is more 
than five times as high (32%) as the breakeven rate. 

Suppose the measure rule predicts price will reach 22 from 20, a rise 
of 10%. How many rounding bottoms will fail to see more than a 10% rise? 
Answer: 14% in bull markets and 20% in bear markets. 

Table 55.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction, by definition, is upward. 
If price closes below the bottom of the pattern before closing above the top 


Table 55.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 43 or 4% 13 or 6% 
10 99 or 14% 31 or 20% 
15 111 or 26% 26 or 32% 
20 81 or 34% 17 or 40% 
25 71 or 41% 31 or 55% 
30 79 or 49% 15 or 62% 
35 65 or 55% 11 or 67% 
50 129 or 68% 24 or 78% 
75 140 or 83% 23 or 88% 


Over 75 172 or 100% 25 or 100% 


846 —_ Rounding Bottoms 


Table 55.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


100% up 
L 39%*, M 45%, 
H 48% 


100% up 
L 22%*, M 45%, 
H 37% 


Throwbacks occurrence 64% 67% 
Average time to throwback peaks 6% in 6 days 8% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 46% 34% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 51% 43% 
Percentage price resumes trend 88% 74% 
Performance with breakout day gap 44% 27% 
Performance without breakout day gap 49% 40% 
Average gap size $0.81 $0.36 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


of it, then you don’t have a valid rounding bottom. Instead, what you have is 
a mistake. 

Yearly position, performance. The sample counts are small in this one. 
Mapping performance onto the yearly price range, we find that the best per- 
forming rounding bottoms are those with breakouts near the yearly middle 
(bear markets) or high (bull markets). It suggests avoiding patterns within a 
third of the yearly low (but additional samples could change that assessment). 

Throwbacks. Throwbacks occur slightly less often in bull market round- 
ing bottoms (64%) than in many other chart patterns (66%). That may be due 
to the excellent performance shown by the pattern (but if that were true, you’d 
see bear market patterns also suffering, and we don’t). 

Price takes the usual amount of time to return to the breakout price 
(12 days). When throwbacks do occur, performance suffers. After a throwback 
completes, price resumes its rise more than 74% of the time on average, which 
is a terrific number. 

Gaps. Breakout day gaps hurt performance, which goes against trading 
lore. Often you will see a gap lead to better performance but not for rounding 
bottoms. This doesn’t appear to be a sample size issue, though. It is what it is. 

Table 55.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones, but only in bull 
markets (giving patterns a 12 percentage point boost). I used the median pat- 
tern height—from highest high to lowest low—divided by the breakout price 
as the benchmark. I show the median in the table for your viewing pleasure. 


Statistics 847 


Table 55.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 54% 36% 
Short pattern performance 42% 39% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 21.9% 25.2% 
Narrow pattern performance 44% 38% 
Wide pattern performance 52% 36% 
Median width 174 days 95 days 
Short and narrow performance 40% 42% 
Short and wide performance 48% 32% 
Tall and wide performance 53% 38% 
Tall and narrow performance 55% 29% 
Table 55.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 64% down 53% down 
Rising volume trend performance 48% 47% 
Falling volume trend performance 48% 28% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 48% 35% 
Light breakout volume performance 46% 45% 


Width. Wide patterns performed better than narrow ones but only in 
bull markets, with the best performance coming from rounding bottoms in bull 
markets. I used the median length as the separator between wide and narrow. 

Notice that rounding bottoms in bull markets are almost twice as wide 
as those in bear markets. It might have something to do with eating too many 
potato chips. 

Height and width combinations. The performance of rounding bot- 
toms tracks the individual performance. For example, in bull markets we know 
that tall patterns outperform, and we see that wide patterns do well, too, so the 
combination of tall and wide also leads to the best performing combination. 
In bear markets, the best performing combination is short and narrow (which 
happens to be the worst performing bull market combination). 

Table 55.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Both markets see volume trending lower most often, as 
found by using linear regression on volume. 


848 — Rounding Bottoms 


Table 55.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 93% 91% 
Middle 12% 13% 
Pattern bottom 1% 2% 
Table 55.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 54% 
2000s 59% 
2010s 42% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 3% 
2000s 4% 
2010s 5% 


Rising/Falling volume. Bear market results favor a rising volume trend, 
but bull markets have no preference. 

Breakout day volume. When breakout volume was below the 30-day 
average in bear markets, rounding bottoms outperformed. The bull market 
shows patterns with heavy breakout volume doing slightly better. 

Table 55.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. Because 
rounding bottoms are so tall, it will be rare that a stop-loss order placed at the 
bottom or even halfway down the pattern will be hit. 

If you choose to use either of those locations (middle or bottom) for stop 
placement, then convert the potential loss into a percentage of the current 
price. If the result is large, then consider moving the stop. Normally Id tell 
you to look for a more promising trade, but rounding bottoms have superb per- 
formance. You might try a volatility stop instead. See the Glossary for details. 

Table 55.8 shows performance over time. I’ll admit that I was curious to 
see if performance of this pattern would sustain itself over the decades. Inci- 
dentally, the 2000s had the only bear markets (two of them), so I don’t include 
the statistics for them. 

Performance over time. The 2010s show performance dwindling com- 
pared to the other two decades. 

Failures over time. Failures have been creeping up over the last 30 years, 
but they still remain low. In this case, I’m looking at 5% failures, which is to 
say, I counted how many patterns failed to see price rise more than 5% after 
the breakout. 


Trading Tactics 849 


Table 55.9 (busted patterns) had too few samples to show these tables. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 55.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule helps estimate the potential 
profit. To apply the measure rule and help you visualize its use, consider the 
chart shown in Figure 55.4. 

Subtract the lowest low in the rounding bottom from the right saucer 
rim. In the figure, the low is 25 and the right saucer rim is (arguably) 31.44 
(point B), giving a formation height of 6.44. Add the height to the value of the 
right saucer rim to get the target price. In this case, the target is 37.88 and 
price reached that level in late January. 

If you consider the right rim as the peak in November (at 35), then the 
target would be higher, (35 — 25) + 35 or 45. If the right rim is missing, then 
don’t bother looking for it. Just use the price of the left rim. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 
We used the full height in the example, and in bull markets, price reaches 
the target 65% of the time on average. If you cut the height in half, you can 
increase the chance of price reaching the closer target. 


Table 55.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Subtract the lowest low in the rounding bottom from the right saucer 
rim (or use the left rim if someone stole the right one). Add the differ- 
ence to the value of the right saucer rim to get the target price. The 
bottom portion of the table shows how often this works. 


Buy bottom If you can determine that a rounding turn is happening, buy near the 
bottom and consider selling when the right rim forms. 
Wait Wait for price to rise (close) above the left saucer rim before buying. 
for breakout If the rounding bottom does not have a left rim, then use the right 
one, or use whichever one is lower. 
Watch Many times price will reach the level of the left saucer rim and then dip 
for handle to form a handle (leaving behind a right rim). Buy when price closes 


above the left/right rim (or pierces a handle trendline moving up). 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 84% 73% 
Percentage reaching full height target 65% 51% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 39% 24% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 25% 12% 


850 —= Rounding Bottoms 


Liz Claiborne (Apparel, NYSE, LIZ) 
1 I" | 
' Wht ila 52 
; " | 
nfl _ 
i ‘yl! 1 48 


Dead-Cat - 46 
Bounce —~44 


~ 40 
lh, Rounding Bottom ; _ 38 


Mh 


Hats 


May 98 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 99 Feb 


Figure 55.4 A treacherous example of a rounding bottom that has no left rim. 
The rounding turn forms after disappointing earnings sends the stock into a dead- 
cat bounce. 


Table 55.3 gives an example of how that table is useful when combined 
with the measure rule, so flip back to that discussion when you have time. 

Buy bottom. In my trade review (see Experience), I have bought rounding 
bottoms as they make the turn at the bottom. If price closes below the bottom of 
the chart pattern, then it’s best to close out the trade. If price rises, then you can 
sell at the right rim or even hold on for an upward breakout and ride price higher. 

Wait for breakout, watch for handle. I consider rounding bottoms to be 
one of the more treacherous chart patterns. Take another look at Figure 55.4. 
In judging when the breakout occurs, you can use either the left or right saucer 
rim (in theory). Use whichever one gets you in soonest. 

Unfortunately, this rounding bottom has no left rim and the right rim 
could be either B or the peak in November. How do you determine a breakout? 

That is the situation I faced. I learned that in such circumstances I needed to 
wait for the handle to form and price to climb above the handle high (or right cup 
rim). When it did (point A), or so I thought, I paper traded the stock and bought 
in just as it crested (point B). That turned out to be a minor high. Price dropped 
the next day and then slowly recovered, making another handle. A good place to 
sell is when price pierced the up trendline in early December, heading down. 


Experience 


One of the harder things to do is determine where the left rim is. If price is 
trending down, you'll see a lot of minor highs as price drops in a drop-retrace- 
drop pattern. Thus, when the stock starts to recover after building a bottom, 


Experience 851 


which minor high on the left do you match to help predict the appearance of 
the right rim? 


Hudson Global 


Figure 55.5 shows an example of this in Hudson Global (HSON). The 
rounded bottom appears from A to G, or does it? What about a lower turn, 
say, B to KF, C to K or even D to E? All of those labels look like valid rounding 
bottoms, but shorter than the AG pattern. 

Why is the left rim important? Because the right rim often forms near the 
price level of the left rim. If you know where the price is likely to turn and form 
a handle, you can trade the rounding bottom from the turn near the bottom to 
the right rim. You'll know how much you are likely to make. 

For the record, because I require an upward breakout from a rounding 
bottom, the AG pattern is not a rounding bottom (because it breaks out down- 
ward when it fails to close above A). 

For the first buy (8 April 2008), I mistakenly had two buy orders outstand- 
ing and they both filled in the handle of the rounding bottom (CF). I placed a 
stop order with my broker and raised it as price climbed. 

I placed a third buy order at 9.57, and on 1 May, the stop filled. I raised 
the stop and included the new shares. 

As price climbed, I continued to raise my stop. On 19 May, I wrote that 
I was worried about price reversing, so I tightened the stop twice in the next 
two days, eventually taking me out of the trade on 22 May. “Sell reason: My 
stop hit, just as I expected even though price closed higher. I tightened the stop 
because of the big 5+% decline yesterday for unexplained reasons (the market 


Hudson Global (HSON) 


tbe I ba = 21 
=19 
I 
| ly, l A : 6 
"hy My a =14 


hy ~~ ; ti ni - 


yay ‘we rae 7 
Hendl 
i! 
Be 


Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan08 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 55.5 Sometimes it can be difficult to find the left rim of a rounded turn. 
The left rim can help determine where the right rim might appear. 


852 Rounding Bottoms 


was also down big). Looks like I sold at the low for the day. I wanted to protect 
my profits.” 

On the three trades, I made 31%, 23%, and 15%. 

I was fortunate enough to sell when I did because the 2007 to 2009 bear 
market took the stock down to 68 cents, well below the sale price of $11. 


¢ Lesson: If a stock has multiple left rims, consider trading the lowest 
pair (left and right rims). 


Encore Wire 


Encore Wire (WIRE) was an unusual trade. The stock dropped in 2007 and 
bottomed in 2008, forming a nice rounded turn. I bought near the bottom just 
after the stock started moving up (which is a setup I’ve used several times). 

The turn was a fakeout that sometimes happens near the middle of the 
rounding turn. The stock retraced the move, it bottomed again, and then 
climbed from there. I held on during the move despite tired fingers. 

In late April, the company announced better than expected earnings and 
the stock gapped up (breakaway gap) by more than 20%. I sold that day to 
capture the gain. 

Over the next two weeks, the stock continued higher, eventually peaking 
at just over 25 before dropping 47%. I sold at 22 for a gain of 24% with a hold 
time of about 2 months, and yet I predicted, correctly, that the stock would 
climb to 24.50, which it did. 


¢ Lesson: If a company announces better than expected earnings in a 
stock you own (and price shoots up 5% or more), consider selling and 
buying back in after the retrace. 

¢ Lesson: If you can correctly identify a rounding bottom, buy near the 
bottom and ride price up to the right rim (or higher). Place a stop 
below the pattern just in case. 


Ferro 


With Ferro (FOE), I bought in 2012 near the bottom of what I believed was 
a rounding bottom, hoping to ride the stock back up. Instead, the bottom fell 
out of the rounding turn and the stock dropped in half. 

My mind was focused on the stock returning to the base of a long cloud 
bank at 18 to 20. You can see it on the monthly charts going back to 1992. The 
bear market of 2007 to 2009 took the stock down from a high of 24 to 81 cents. 
It bounced back to 18, the cloud base, before plummeting again, reaching a 
low of 2.38. It was during this second drop when I bought. 

The stock began another recovery that took it back up to 15. In late 2013, 
the stock moved sideways for more than a year. When it showed weakness in 


Sample Trade 853 


early 2015, I got tired of waiting for the upward move to resume and sold it for 
a 133% gain. I was hoping for more, a return to the cloudbank at 18 to 20, but 
it never made it (meaning the stock found the ultimate high at 15 and change 
before dropping by 27%). 


¢ Lesson: Even though I doubled my money, when price closed below the 
bottom of the rounding turn, I should have sold and taken a small loss. 
Millennium Pharmaceuticals 


I bought Millennium Pharmaceuticals (MLNM) in May 2005 in the handle of 
a rounded turn (which now looks like a descending scallop). I bought before 
confirmation, and the stock burned me. Price dropped, and I sold on the way 
down, taking a loss on the trade. The same thing happened on Stein Mart 
(SMRT) where I took a small loss. 


¢ Lesson: If you’re thinking of buying during creation of the handle, wait 
for confirmation (price to close above the right rim) before buying. 


Sample Trade 


How do you use the trading tactics to improve your investment performance? 
Consider what Glen did with the situation shown in Figure 55.6, on the weekly 


Alco Standard Corp (Office Equipment & Supplies, NYSE, ASN) 


Rounding Bottom 
| Stopped Out Here 20 
Glen Buys the Stock ~19 


I 
i | it 


Trend Line 


N 
| fy lita) yo 
| vila i 


Double Bottom 


91 S OND92FMAMJ ] ASO ND93FMAMJ J AS OND94E MAM] J AS OND 


Figure 55.6 The double bottom pattern is barely discernible within the rounding 
bottom on the weekly scale. 


854 — Rounding Bottoms 


scale. His dream was to become a day trader, but he had neither the trading 
capital nor the necessary experience for the job. He decided to get there one 
trade at a time, using the longer time scales and working down to day trading. 

In December, as he was flipping through his charts, he came across what 
appeared to be a mild double bottom. On the daily chart the two bottoms in 
August and November 1992 were barely discernible (remember, this is the 
weekly scale). Was it a valid chart pattern, and should he buy the stock now? 

“The retrace between the two bottoms was not high enough and the two 
bottoms were not clear enough to be worth considering,” he told me. He justi- 
fied his action by thinking that if he was having a hard time spotting the chart 
pattern, then others would have the same trouble. If no one spots the chart 
pattern, then price may not rise or behave like he expected. 

When he flipped to the weekly chart, it changed the characterization of 
what he was seeing. On his screen was an obvious rounding bottom. The vol- 
ume pattern supported the conclusion: receding as price declined and round- 
ing up as price rose. So, he decided to wait for the rounding bottom to stop 
near the left rim at about 21.38. 

When it paused for 2 weeks in February, he knew the stock was primed. 
The question then became, what was it going to do next? The only way to find 
that out was to wait. 

The following week price dropped. “I waited until price closed above the 
right rim. I knew that to buy earlier would risk a reversal and the stock might 
not recover for a long time. If the stock moved above the right rim, then the 
probabilities suggested a continued rise.” 

When price hit 22, he bought. He looked back at his chart and decided to 
put a stop-loss order 15 cents below the saucer rim, just below a support level. 
He decided that if the stock hit his stop, in all likelihood it was going down. 

Satisfied with his investment decision and trading plan, he was confident 
that his career change to day trading was a simple step away. “I was even more 
confident as the stock climbed. Overconfident. Don’t laugh, but I started look- 
ing through brochures from several companies that offered seminars on day 
trading. I thought Id turn pro.” 

The stock declined and closed below the up trendline for two days. 
“It was a warning sign anyone could have missed. The following week, my 
world ended.” 

He received a call from his broker saying price had hit his stop-loss order. 
“T was upset. I threw things and booked a loss of about a buck a share.” 

As he watched the stock, he became even more upset. He sold at the low 
for the week. 

Three years later, after day trading was over for the day, Glen happened 
to review this trade. He decided to pull up the chart and gasped at what he 
found. The stock peaked at 66, exactly triple his purchase price. 


36 


Rounding Tops 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: As price moves up, it forms a convex curve. 


Upward Breakouts 

Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish Short-term bullish 

continuation reversal 

Performance rank 2 out of 39 19 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 9% 17% 
Average rise 55% 23% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
‘Throwbacks 63% 64% 
Percentage meeting price target 58% 34% 


Synonyms 
See also 


Domes, rounding turns 


Bump-and-run reversal tops; head-and-shoulders 
tops, complex; scallops, ascending and inverted; 
scallops, descending and inverted 


855 


856 — Rounding Tops 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Reversal or continuation 


Short-term bearish 


Short-term bearish 


reversal continuation 
Performance rank 3 out of 36 16 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 20% 12% 
Average drop 17% 21% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
Pullbacks 58% 62% 
Percentage meeting 14% 12% 


price target 


When is a top not a top? When it is a rounding top and price breaks out 
upward 58% of the time in bull markets. 

The Results Snapshot shows the performance results that range from sec- 
ond and third to (almost) worst. In bull markets, rounding tops place second 
with average gains of 55%. Contrast that with bear markets where the average 
rise is 23% and performance ranks almost last: 19 out of 20 (where 1 is best). 

I was wondering if I was dreaming these results. How can they be so 
good and so bad? Maybe the answer is low sample counts, so I scanned more 
data and doubled the number of samples. The results changed but only by tiny 
amounts (which is reassuring, really). 

Because these patterns are often tall, the measure rule (“percentage meet- 
ing price target”) suffers, with the best result coming in at 58% and the worst 
at 12%. That’s using the pattern’s full height to predict a target. [’ll talk about 
the measure rule later in Trading Tactics. 

Let’s take a tour of the pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 56.1 shows an example of a rounding turn on the daily scale. Notice 
how the starting (A) and ending (B) points are nearly the same price. This 
characteristic differentiates the pattern from an inverted scallop, either ascend- 
ing or descending. A single bump also separates it from a complex head-and- 
shoulders top, although I did not remove any rounding turns that were part of 
a head-and-shoulders pattern. 

In this example, the turn is gentle but still has irregular price moves pok- 
ing through (points C and D). Volume trends upward in this case, and that is 
unusual for rounding turns (but the volume trend is close to random anyway). 


Identification Guidelines 857 


Alpharma (Medical Supplies, NYSE, ALO) 


c 
ij 


ull S 


Myo 
Wa 
\ 


| | ] 
Lge ' 
B 


wll fat, y 
I! it fare | 
| toy, - 26 


ip we 
Hy a I 
ha byte ly 


Ip. | 
Py felt i 
E | | Why A] It 
| My | | 4 h, 24 
Breakout -23 


Hh, 


; i) 
A 


Confirmation Line 


il 


F 


95 Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 56.1 A rounding turn begins at point A and rounds over to end near 
the price of where it begins (B). Points C and D make the curve look irregular, 
but they occur often in rounding turns. Volume usually trends downward, unlike 
this example. 


The reason a rounding turn occurs is not difficult to explain. Price moves 
up on bullish enthusiasm confirmed by high volume at the start. Knowing that 
price is climbing, sellers hold onto their shares a bit longer, forcing demand to 
climb along with share price. However, as price rises, buying demand tapers off 
and eventually catches up with supply. Price rounds over at the top. Since the 
shares are fetching a premium to intrinsic value, more sellers appear. The smart 
money starts selling, too, and price drops. 

Once investors discover the upward price momentum has turned, selling 
pressure increases, forcing price down. Volume may pick up as more traders 
try to dump their shares as price declines. Eventually, the decline ends when 
nervous novices toss in the towel and sell their holdings. When all those who 
considered selling their shares have sold, the smart money jumps in and buys 
the stock, or sells it short, eventually pushing the stock to new highs (upward 
breakouts) or new lows (downward breakouts). 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 56.1 lists identification guidelines. 


858 — Rounding Tops 


Table 56.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Look for price to rise into a curving turn (convex), forming an inverted 
bowl or saucer. 
Daily or Rounding tops are often long enough to appear on the weekly charts as 
weekly scale well as the dailies. 


Even end price __ The price at the start of the pattern is close to the end of the pattern. 
Don’t use this as a hard rule to exclude rounded turns with uneven 
bottoms. Think of this as guidance to avoid scallop-shaped patterns 
which tend to be narrower than rounded turns. 


Volume Volume is occasionally higher on either end and shallower in the center. 
Breakout A close above the highest high in the pattern signals an upward 
direction breakout; a close below the lowest rim signals a downward breakout. 


Abbot Laboratories (Medical Supplies, NYSE, ABT) 


hy 


| Confirmation Line 


oda | 
Throwback 


00 Dec Jan 01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 56.2 Two rounding turns with the ends nearly at the same price. Both 
have U-shaped volume and upward breakouts. 


Appearance. Figure 56.2 shows a good example of a rounded top in 
the pattern on the right of the chart, from July to September. Price rises from 
point A (in both patterns) and rounds over at the top of the pattern. Price 
heads down and retraces much of the prior rise, leaving behind a dome or 
inverted bowl on the chart. 

Daily or weekly scale. Rounded turns are often wide and tall enough to 
appear on either the daily or weekly charts. 


Focus on Failures 859 


Even end price. Look for the ends of the rounding turn to bottom near 
the same price. In the patterns I looked at, the bottom-to-bottom price varia- 
tion averaged 4%, with a median of 2%. What you want to avoid is selecting 
patterns that are really inverted scallops. Those have starting or ending prices 
well away from the other rim. However, if price forms a nice and wide dome 
shape with uneven bottoms, that’s fine. The preference is to have the two val- 
leys bottom near the same price. 

Volume. Volume is often lowest at the center of the turn and higher at 
either end. This observation is just a guideline, not an inviolable rule. Many 
times you will see an irregular volume trend over the life of the chart pattern. 
Pay it no heed; it is still a rounding top. What is important is that price rounds 
over and a bowl-shaped volume trend just adds evidence to the veracity of the 
chart pattern. 

Breakout direction. The breakout can be in either direction. An upward 
breakout occurs when price closes above the pattern’s high. A downward break- 
out happens when price closes below the lower of the two rims. 

Figure 56.2 shows two examples of rounding turns on the daily scale. 
Notice the gentle curve with the August pattern appearing more rounded. The 
February pattern looks like someone squeezed it in a vice—an inverted V shape. 

The start and end of each pattern is at nearly the same price. That char- 
acteristic differentiates rounding turns from scallops. The rounding turn may 
be part of a complex head-and-shoulders pattern, so check for that, and if so, 
trade it as a complex head-and-shoulders pattern. 

Both rounded tops (in the figure) break out upward when price closes 
above the highest high in the pattern. For downward breakouts, price must 
close below point B. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 56.3 shows a typical example of a failure when price fails to rise more 
than 5% after the breakout. The chart pattern obeys the identification guide- 
lines because the turn appears rounded with price at A and B (the pattern’s start 
and end) nearly the same. 

Buying demand and selling pressure determines stock price movement. 
Fundamentals drive those forces. If news comes out that a company is consid- 
ering bankruptcy, you can be sure the stock price is going down. Most news 
influences price less. 

For example, beginning in late January 2002, natural gas prices started 
rising and broke out upward from a symmetrical triangle in March, just as 
the stock made a minor high. Gas prices peaked in May and started a long 
slide that ended in August. By contrast, the stock peaked in March 2002 and 
continued lower. Even as natural gas prices were making new highs, the stock 
was tumbling—“diverging” as we call it. However, both the stock and natural 


860 — Rounding Tops 


National Fuel Gas (Natural Gas (Diversified), NYSE, NFG) _~ 30 
-29 
ly | [is i 
My {MW — 28 
i, } i vy _, 
! My it -7 
| i ' 
My i! Ml 

Overhead - 26 


Resistance 


hy | 


-19 
01 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec JanO2 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 56.3. Overhead resistance blocks this rounding turn’s upward breakout. 


gas bottomed within a few weeks of each other, with the stock leading the 
way higher. 

Technical factors also influence price movement and contribute to pat- 
tern failure. For example, if you know that Joe Trader is buying and his record 
is the envy of the industry, you may want to buy, too. This herd instinct is 
what momentum is all about. Another example: Mutual funds may spread their 
trades over several days to try to keep their elephant-like movements secret. 
If you learn of a mutual fund selling a large block of shares of a stock you own, 
you may wonder, what do they know that I don’t? You may decide to dump 
your holdings too. This selling pressure contributes to downward momentum. 

Returning to the figure, the stock stages an upward breakout in March 
2002, but bumps against overhead resistance. I only show the end of the 
resistance zone that dates back to December 1997, about 5 years before the 
pattern appeared. You can see how price tried in August, September, and again 
in October to push through the ceiling. In early March 2002, it succeeded in 
making a new high, but the rise soon faltered, predicting a tumble in natural 
gas prices. Not shown, but in late July the stock dropped to 15.61, a mul- 
tiyear low. 

Many times the reason price changes trend is not as clear as in this 
example (overhead resistance and diverging gas prices). However, by digging 
into the fundamentals and with knowledge of the technicals—spiced with 
experience—you will be surprised at how often you can call the turns. 


Statistics 861 


Statistics 


Table 56.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I uncovered 1,434 rounding tops in 651 stocks with 
the first found in July 1991 and the most recent February 2020. Not all stocks 
covered the entire period, and some stocks no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. The trend followers (bull 
market/up breakout and bear market/down breakout) show continuation pat- 
terns happening most often. Countertrend patterns prefer reversals. 

Notice how the widest spread between the appearance of reversals and 
continuations follows the market trend. In other words, the two columns 
bull market/up breakout and bear market/down breakout have continuations 
appearing far more often than reversals. The countertrend columns, the two 
inner ones, show smaller differences. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Upward breakouts show patterns 
acting as reversals outperforming continuations. Downward breakouts show 
the reverse with continuations performing better. 

If you want to use this finding, then look at the inbound price trend (the 
price trend leading to the pattern’s start). If it’s above the top of the chart pat- 
tern, then the price trend is downward. If price breaks out upward, then you’re 
looking at a reversal of the downward inbound trend. A downward breakout 
would be a continuation of the downtrend. 


Table 56.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 552 197 399 286 


Reversal (R), con- 35% R, 65% C 55% R, 45% C 53% R, 47% C 34% R, 66% C 
tinuation (C) 
occurrence 

Reversal, con- 61% R, 51% C 27%R, 19% C -16%R,-19% C -17% R, -22% C 
tinuation 


performance 

Average rise 55% 23% -17% -21% 
or decline 

Standard & Poor’s 14% -2% 4% -8% 
500 change 

Days to ultimate 288 83 47 27 
high or low 

How many 65% 38% 35% 42% 


change trend? 


862 = Rounding Tops 


Apply the same logic to a rounding top in a rising price trend. Upward 
breakouts act as continuations of the uptrend and downward breakouts act as 
reversals. 

Average rise or decline. As one might expect, the average rise in 
bull markets is the best performing column of the four. The numbers sug- 
gest you will want to trade this pattern with the market trend: upward in 
bull markets and downward in bear markets. Countertrend moves show 
weaker results. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. I found the results shown in the table 
by using the dates of the breakout to ultimate high or low of the rounding top 
and applied that to the S&P. You might say that the index helped or hurt the 
performance of the rounding top, depending on the breakout direction. I know 
from analysis of my own trades that the market trend helps when the market 
moves in the same direction as the stock (if I buy, I hope the market rises, too) 
and it hurts performance when the market goes against the stock. 

Days to ultimate high or low. The rise in bull markets (55% in 288 
days) takes longer to reach the ultimate high than the decline in bear markets 
(21% in 27 days) takes to reach the ultimate low. The decline must be steeper 
than the rise. Indeed, the speed of the bear market decline is not one and not 
two but 4.1 times as fast as the rise in bull markets. If the bear market were a 
vacuum cleaner, you could say it really sucks (price lower). 

How many change trend? This is a measure of many rounding tops see- 
ing price move more than 20% after the breakout. I consider values above 50% 
for upward breakouts to be wonderful. For downward breakouts, the average is 
a more modest 28% in bull markets and 49% in bear markets. In other words, 
the bull market numbers are better than average, but the bear market numbers 
fall short. 

What all of this means is that the higher the number shown in the table, 
the better your chance of making money. 

Table 56.3 shows failure rates. The lowest failure rates associate with the 
market trend: trading long in bull markets and short in bear markets. Coun- 
tertrend trades have more risk. 

For example, 18% of rounding tops in bull markets with upward breakouts 
fail to see price rise more than 10%, but in bear markets, 37% fail to see price rise 
as far. Half of the patterns (53%) in bull markets fail to see price rise more than 
35% compared to a failure rate of 79% for bear markets with upward breakouts. 

You can see how the failure rates start low and climb quickly for small 
changes in the maximum price rise or decline. For example, rounding tops in 
bear markets with downward breakouts show failures of 12%, 28%, and 44% 
for declines of 5%, 10%, and 15%, respectively. 

How are these numbers useful? Imagine that the measure rule says price 
will rise from 20 to 22 in bull markets. That’s a rise of 10%. How many round- 
ing tops will fail to see price rise by more than 10%? Answer: 18%, or 82% of 
trades will exceed a 10% rise. That’s quite good. 


Statistics 863 


Table 56.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum 
Price Rise or Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Decline (%) Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 49 or 9% 34 or 17% 80 or 20% 34 or 12% 
10 53 or 18% 39 or 37% 75 or 39% 45 or 28% 
15 43 or 26% 32 or 53% 52 or 52% 48 or 44% 
20 46 or 35% 18 or 62% 52 or 65% 38 or 58% 
25 38 or 41% 14 or 70% 45 or 76% 26 or 67% 
30 34 or 48% 11 or 75% 25 or 82% 23 or 75% 
35 29 or 53% 8 or 79% 22 or 88% 23 or 83% 
50 82 or 68% 20 or 89% 37 or 97% 40 or 97% 
75 69 or 80% 13 or 96% 11 or 100% 8 or 100% 
Over 75 109 or 100% 8or100% 0 or 100% 1 or 100% 


Table 56.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The breakout direction tracks the market trend. 
The highest percentage of breakouts appears in bull markets for upward break- 
outs and bear markets for downward breakouts. This makes intuitive sense (as 
in a rising tide lifts all boats or trade with the [market] trend). 

Yearly position, performance. After sorting the samples by breakout 
direction and market condition, then sorting them again into where they 
appear in the yearly price range, some of the entries show few samples. 

Rounding tops within a third of the yearly low show the best perfor- 
mance. You'll want to avoid those near the yearly high. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. A throwback or pullback occurs about 60% 
of the time, which is a little low compared to other chart pattern types (which 
average about 66%). It takes, on average, 11 days for the stock to return to the 
breakout price. Throwbacks and pullbacks hurt performance, which is a trend 
we see in many other chart pattern types. 

After a throwback or pullback completes, price resumes trending in 
the breakout direction most of the time except after downward breakouts in 
bear markets where price rises 57% of the time (it continues lower 43% of 
the time). 

Gaps. The two outer columns (the trend followers) prefer patterns with 
no gaps for better performance. Countertrend patterns (the two inner col- 
umns) show patterns with gaps have better performance. Because the perfor- 
mance difference in most columns is only one percentage point, I wouldn’t 
lose any sleep over these results. 

Table 56.5 shows pattern size statistics. 


864 


Rounding Tops 


Table 56.4 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Down Down 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Breakout Breakout 
Breakout direction 58% up 41% up 42% down 59% down 
Performance of L 83%*, L 44%*, L-18%, L -22%, 

breakouts occur- M 60%, M 26%, M -15%, M -16%, 

ring near the H 54% H 20% H -8%* H -1%* 

12-month low 

(L), middle (M), 

or high (H) 
Throwbacks/pull- 63% 64% 58% 62% 


backs occurrence 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback ends 


Average rise/decline 
for patterns with 
throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 


Average rise/decline 
for patterns 
without throw- 
backs/pullbacks 


Percentage price 
resumes trend 


Performance with 
breakout day gap 


Performance without 
breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


5% in 6 days 


11 days 


54% 


56% 


85% 


54% 
55% 


$0.98 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


7% in 5 days 


11 days 


22% 


24% 


63% 


25% 
22% 


$0.47 


-7% in 5 days 


11 days 


-17% 


-18% 


63% 


-18% 
-17% 


$1.18 


-11% in 5 days 


11 days 


-19% 


-23% 


43% 


-20% 
-21% 


$1.81 


Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones in all market condi- 
tions and breakout directions. To determine if your pattern is tall, measure the 
height from highest peak to lowest rim and divide the height by the breakout 
price. A value greater than the median shown in the table means it’s a tall pat- 
tern. Give yourself an edge and trade only tall patterns. 


Statistics 865 


Table 56.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern 62% 26% -18% -23% 
performance 
Short pattern 47% 20% -16% -18% 
performance 
Median height as 24.9% 25.7% 36.2% 52.1% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 52% 22% -17% -19% 
performance 
Wide pattern 57% 24% -18% -22% 
performance 
Median width 145 days 83 days 149 days 118 days 
Short and narrow 48% 21% -16% -18% 
performance 
Short and wide 44% 18% -15% -19% 
performance 
Tall and wide 64% 26% -19% -23% 
performance 
Tall and narrow 60% 25% -18% -23% 
performance 


Width. I used the median width as the separator between narrow and 
wide. Performance of wide patterns beats that of narrow ones. Consider trad- 
ing only wide patterns. 

Height and width combinations. Patterns both tall and wide perform 
as well or better than the other combinations in all four columns. For example, 
if you trade short and wide patterns in bull markets after upward breakouts, do 
it often enough and perfectly, you’ll make an average of 44%. Trade tall and 
wide patterns and you'll do almost 50% better, with gains averaging 64%. 

Table 56.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. The table shows the volume trend, but the results are 
close to random. Don’t discard a chart pattern because it has an unusual 
volume trend. 

Rising/Falling volume. Three of four columns show better performance 
if volume recedes in the pattern. 

Breakout day volume. In all four columns, we see performance improve 
if breakout day volume is above the 1-month average (heavy volume). 


866 — Rounding Tops 


Table 56.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 51% down 59% down 53% up 52% up 
Rising volume 61% 19% -16% -20% 

trend 

performance 
Falling volume 48% 26% -18% -21% 

trend 

performance 
Heavy breakout 58% 23% -18% -21% 

volume 

performance 
Light breakout 44% 22% -15% -19% 

volume 

performance 

Table 56.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 48% -20% 
2000s 76% -14% 
2010s 47% -15% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 10% 17% 
2000s 6% 23% 
2010s 9% 23% 


Table 56.7 is supposed to show stop location, but with the pattern so 
tall, the middle and side opposite the breakout almost never trigger a stop, so 
I don’t show the table. 

Table 56.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. Performance was outstanding in the 2000s for 
upward breakouts, but the other two decades showed similar performance. Down- 
ward breakouts had the worst performance in the 2000s and the best in the 1990s. 

Failures over time. For both columns, failures haven’t varied too much 
from decade to decade. Upward breakouts suffered more failures in the 1990s, 
but downward breakouts had the fewest then. 

Table 56.9 is reserved for busted patterns, but I’ll wait for more samples 
to see if it’s worth presenting. Look at Table 56.3, the 10% row. Few patterns 
fail to see price move 10% or less away from the breakout and busted patterns 
are even fewer. I don’t show the table. 


Trading Tactics 867 


Trading Tactics 


Table 56.10 shows trading tactics for rounding tops. 

Measure rule. Use the measure rule to capture a price target. Compute 
the height of the rounding top and add it to the top of the pattern for upward 
breakouts or subtract the height from the lower of the two rims. The bottom 
portion of the table shows how often the method works. 

For example, if we use the full height of the rounding top for upward 
breakouts in bull markets, price will reach or exceed the target an average of 
58% of the time. Take out the table saw, cut the height in half, and use that in 
the calculation and price will reach the target an average of 77% of the time. 

When using the rule, be sure to look for resistance or support areas. They 
are areas where the stock is likely to stall or reverse. 

In Figure 56.4, for example, point A shows the lowest low at the right rim, 
45.63, whereas point B depicts the highest high at 49.88. Add the difference, 
4.25 (the formation height), to the price of the highest high (point B) to get the 
upward breakout target. In this case, the target is 54.13, met in early July. 

Table 56.3 gives an example of how to check the probability of the trade 
failing to reach the target. Refer to the discussion of the table for a cheap thrill. 

Buy above 30% retrace. For upward breakouts, the typical entry means 
buying when price closes above the dome high. If you like to take more risk, 


Table 56.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the pattern’s height by subtracting the lower rim low from 
the pattern’s high. Add the difference to the high for upward break- 
outs or subtract the difference from the lower rim low for downward 
breakouts to get the target price. The bottom portion of the table 
shows how often this method works. 


Buy above For a more risky but profitable trade, buy when price rises above the 
30% retrace right rim (low) by at least 30% of the pattern’s height. 


Right low support The right rim low shows support. If price throws back to this level and 
continues down, sell or sell short. 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reach- 88% 77% 63% 59% 

ing quarter 

height target 
Percentage 77% 57% 38% 35% 

reaching half 

height target 
Percentage 58% 34% 14% 12% 

reaching full 


height target 


868 —§ Rounding Tops 


buy at a lower price (30% of the formation height, above the right rim low). 
I use the 30% retrace amount since a rise of that magnitude usually breaks 
a down-sloping trendline that sometimes forms as price declines during the 
rounding turn. A breakthrough of a trendline or even a 30% retrace is usually 
strong enough to command attention from other investors (they jump on the 
uptrend) and minimizes the chance of a downward breakout. 

Right low support. If you purchase a stock after a rounding turn completes 
(near the bottom of the pattern) and see price rise for a month or so, curl around, and 
fall below the right rim low, sell the stock. Most likely it is going to continue down. 
Watch for a bounce at the right rim low as that area sometimes acts as a support 
zone. As always, look for other areas of support to gauge how far the decline may 
go. Even if you see nearby support, the stock may continue lower just to spite you. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


J.B. Hunt 


I haven’t traded rounding tops often. In J.B. Hunt stock, back in 1999, I cor- 
rectly guessed that the stock had completed a rounding top and bought the 
stock as it bottomed at the right rim. The stock started to recover and moved 
higher for about 2 months before it slid below the price of the right rim. I sold 
my position and took an 8% loss. 

I traded this properly and feel glad that I sold when I did. The stock con- 
tinued down more than 30% below my sale price. (It’s always gratifying when 
your trading decisions are proven correct). 

The mistake I made was buying when I did. Had I waited to buy using the 
30% rule (buy after price rises 30% above the right rim low), then I would not 
have entered this trade and would not have taken a loss. 


¢ Lesson: For aggressive traders, wait for price to rise at least 30% above 
the right rim low. 


Rowan Company 


In another rounding top trade, here’s what I wrote in my trading notebook: 
“21 December 1999. If this stock [Rowan Company, (RDC)] closes above the 
old high of 21, then it will be a buy. Otherwise, look for the stock to stall at the 
top, in a rounding turn failure. However, fundamentals indicate a strengthen- 
ing demand for drilling rigs. One company is expanding [their] exploration 
budget by 20% in 2000.” 


Sample Trade 869 


I bought the stock after it confirmed an upward breakout from a rounding 
top (a wider view of the chart pattern shows it to be an inverted and ascend- 
ing scallop). 

Nine days later, I wrote more. “I bought at 21, near the daily low of 20 
13/16 (as of 9:45 anyway). Oils are weak today, but this [stock] has made a new 
high and drillers I expect to do well next year. More rigs are coming online 
now, and drilling activity is picking up. This has peaked above the top of the 
rounding turn in August, and I expect the stock to continue moving up. I see 
support at 20, stop at 19.” 

I sold in May at 29.75 and made 41% on the trade. Sadly, I don’t have any 
notes about the sale. However, the stock reached the ultimate high of 32.38 
a week before I sold (so I was close to a perfect exit). The stock moved side- 
ways, with large price swings for about a year, then headed lower and bot- 
tomed near 11. 

This was another well-timed trade. I bought at the confirmed upward 
breakout and held on until the ultimate high and sold near there. 


¢ Lesson: Wait for price to confirm an upward breakout before buying 
a rounded top. 


Sample Trade 


Sharon is a high-energy player. She is the one you see careening out of control 
when skiing down the expert slope. She is the one you see night after night 
relaxing in a bar after work, surrounded by men. In other words, she is fun to 
be with, the life of the party. 

Her investment style mirrors her lifestyle. When she spotted the round- 
ing top pictured in Figure 56.4, she waited for just the right moment to buy. 
At first she thought it might be a head-and-shoulders top, but the two shoul- 
ders and head (B) were at about the same price level and the volume pattern 
was all wrong. 

In mid-June, when price began heading up and pierced the down-sloping 
trendline, “I bought at 47, gripped tightly, and held on.” 

As price climbed, she noticed that the oscillations from minor high to 
minor low seemed to be narrowing. To her, these oscillations indicated that a 
rising wedge was forming, but the volume pattern was abnormal. With a rising 
wedge, the volume pattern tends to recede over time. 

In early September, “I became concerned because volume declined dra- 
matically.” Her research showed a tendency for a severe drop in volume just 
before a rising wedge breakout, so the day after price pierced the lower wedge 
trendline, “I sold the stock at 62. Glad I did, too.” 

Her analysis was perfect. After she sold the stock, price pulled back to the 
lower wedge trendline and hung on for 2 more days before tumbling. At the 


870 — Rounding Tops 


Tandy Corporation (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, TAN) 


Target Price —i 
lll 


Rounding Top 
Down 


B F 
hoy oh Trend Line 
iI Val hy Maly fp y 


My 


' 
jh In| if "nl i" Stock Bought ~47 


tly 
] it ml A _44 


Feb 95 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 56.4 A rounding top with a rising wedge. As described in the Sample 
Trade, this rounding top turned into a profitable opportunity for Sharon. 


start of the New Year, the stock reached a low of 34.13, or 45% below where 
her sale price. 
“T need the cash because I’m thinking of taking up fencing.” 
“Construction?” I asked. “You’re starting a new business?” 


37 


Scallops, Ascending 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price peaks, curves downward, and then forms a higher peak. The price 
pattern looks like the letter J. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish Short-term bullish 
continuation continuation 
Performance rank 20 out of 39 18 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 11% 18% 
Average rise 42% 23% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
‘Throwbacks 68% 64% 
Percentage meeting price target 62% 35% 
See also Cup with handle; head-and-shoulders bottoms, 


complex; rounding bottoms 


871 


872 Scallops, Ascending 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish reversal 
Performance rank 22 out of 36 
Breakeven failure rate 23% 
Average drop 15% 
Volume trend Upward 
Pullbacks 64% 
Percentage meeting price target 29% 


What impresses me most about ascending scallops is how poorly they perform. 
I consider well-behaved patterns as those with breakeven failure rates below 
10%. In bull markets with downward breakouts, 23% fail to decline more than 
5%. Upward breakouts perform better, but the 11% and 18% failure rates do 
not inspire confidence. The average rise or decline is also below par for both 
breakout directions. That’s backed up by the performance rank, which is mid- 
list to near bottom of the list. 

Perhaps the only redeeming quality of ascending scallops is their ability 
to predict the end of the trend. 

That’s invaluable. That’s worth paying attention to. 

Some scallops get narrower and shorter when compared with prior scal- 
lops in a series. For example, in a line of three ascending scallops, the first one 
will be wider and taller than the last one. Also, a downward breakout from a 
scallop perched at the summit (the end of an upward price trend) is bearish and 
usually means a trend change. 

Let’s see what these patterns look like, and maybe we’ll explore these 
peculiarities. 


Tour 


Figure 57.1 shows three ascending scallops, with the first one being an espe- 
cially wide one. It looks like a rounding bottom except that the minor high, 
where the scallop ends on the right (in mid-April), is well above the minor high 
on the left (during early December). This is typical for ascending scallops—the 
right side should be above the left. However, it is fine if the two peaks are close 
to each other in price. When that happens, it often signals an end to the series 
of scallops and the rising price trend. 

The J-shape of the scallop appears best on the smallest scallop in the fig- 
ure. I highlight this one with some consternation. When hunting for scallops, 
one should look at the price lows, not the highs for the curving trend. If you 


Identification Guidelines 873 
Great Atlantic and Pacific (Grocery, NYSE, GAP) 


Scallop ! oly | 


Ascending Scallop hs | I - 32 


I 


i | - 30 

i -29 
Ihr the | 

hi 1 My ! -27 


inl" 


‘t ih, es 
\ it a I hh th | ’ 
li | PI H Tm i 


Oct 92 Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 57.1 Three ascending scallops. Scallops resemble the letter J. 


connect the minor lows of the first two scallops, you see that price has a bowl 
shape. The bowl shape is not clear in the smallest formation unless you trace 
along the highs. 

The smallest scallop also has the best volume pattern—a U-shaped trend. 
This is common for ascending scallops but should not be viewed as a require- 
ment. The first scallop does not have an easily recognizable bowl-shaped vol- 
ume trend, but it is there. The volume spikes are higher near the scallop’s ends 
than in the center. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 57.1 shows the identification guidelines for the ascending scallop. 

Appearance. Ascending scallops resemble the letter J. The peak on the 
left side is below the right side with a rounded recession in between. The two 
peaks should not be near each other in price (otherwise, you have a cup with 
handle, rounding turn, or even a double top chart pattern). There’s an excep- 
tion for this when the appearance of a scallop is near the trend end. They tend 
to have nearly the same start and end prices. 

Price trend. As one might guess from the pattern’s name, ascending scal- 
lops appear in a rising price trend. Rarely do they occur in a declining trend. 
More often, the scallop will signal a trend change (from down to up) when it 
appears after a long downtrend. 


874 Scallops, Ascending 


Table 57.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Look for two price peaks with a rounded recession in between and a 
higher right peak. Ascending scallops look like the letter J. 

Price trend Price should rise leading to ascending scallops. 

Volume Ascending scallops often show a U-shaped volume trend. 

Width Scallops tend to be wider near the start of a trend than near the end, 
but allow variations. 

Breakout Can be upward or downward. A breakout happens when price closes 

direction above the top of the pattern or below the bottom of it. 


Volume. Volume usually resembles the price pattern: higher at the ends 
than in the middle. However, do not exclude a scallop with domed or other 
shaped volume. 

Width. Wide scallops usually mark the start of a rising price trend and 
narrow ones appear near the end of the trend. I base this observation on the 
average scallop width, so sometimes you see just the opposite: a wide scallop at 
the end of a trend and narrower ones near the start. 

Breakout direction. Price can break out either up or down; however, 
because price ends the pattern near the top of it, an upward breakout is most likely. 

Figure 57.2 shows two examples of ascending scallops. The left one has 
an upward breakout and the right one has a downward one. An upward break- 
out occurs when price closes above the highest high in the pattern (above 
point A); a downward breakout happens when price closes below the lowest 
low (below point B). 

The J shape of each scallop is well defined with the end far above the 
price at the start. Between the beginning and end is a rounded-looking, con- 
cave recession forming the bottom of the pattern. Sometimes the turn looks 
irregular with a few price bars getting in the way of a curved line drawn along 
the valley lows, but that is fine. Use the figures in this chapter as examples of 
ascending scallops. 


Focus on Failures 


Scallops suffer from what I call 5% failures. A 5% failure happens when price 
breaks out in the intended direction but fails to continue moving in the same 
direction by more than 5%. Price doubles back and heads in the opposite 
direction, sometimes causing a trader to lose money. 

Figure 57.3 shows an example of failure. There is nothing wrong with 
the April-May ascending scallop. Price rounds up nicely and continues higher 
while the volume pattern is bowl-shaped if you disregard the twin spikes in 
early May. 


Focus on Failures 875 


Butler Manufacturing (Building Materials, NYSE, BBR) a 


hy etry I Ht, mt 
yer, , vl “a “ 
A / -27 
ih i" : 
| I, be 
; | \ ~25 
| rn \ —24 
| hy | | Breakout 


98 Dec jJang99 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 57.2 Two ascending scallops, the first with an upward breakout and the 
second with a downward one. Price must close above the top or below the bottom 
of the scallop to stage a breakout. 


Abitibi-Consolidated (Paper & Forest Products, NYSE, ABY) 


ae iee -20 
Scallop High Point 
— , -19 
| Halt 


I 
} 
Mh, i 18 


ie 17 


is, 


| 
ih \ Wi hy 


ly i 
| | | fa 


Ascending Scallop | | 
| tna! 


a 


{ly ' a 


-15 

it 
li Hal atl eile 
pil -13 


“tl 


-12 


-11 


-10 
Mar 95 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 57.3. An ascending scallop failure in late June. Most scallops act as con- 
solidations of the trend, but the narrow ascending scallop in late June marks the 
high for the stock. 


However, the late June scallop marks the high for the stock. Again, there is 
really nothing wrong with the pattern. The J shape is pronounced and smooth. 
The volume pattern is somewhat rugged but higher on either end than in the 


876 — Scallops, Ascending 


center. The narrowness of the formation is a clue to its failure (remember, 
scallops in a series can become short and narrow as price climbs, signaling an 
end to the upward price trend). It is about 2 weeks wide, which is quite nar- 
row for scallops (the median width is over a month long). From the high at 19, 
the stock heads down in a choppy manner until the end of the study (mid-July 
1996), where it is at 13.50. 


Statistics 


Table 57.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I dug up 2,197 scallops in 640 stocks with the first one 
found in June 1991 and the most recent in November 2019. Not all stocks 
covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. Because I found so few 
patterns in bear markets with downward breakouts, they are not included in 
this chapter. I prefer to leave them off rather than provide misleading statistics 
that will change when more samples are added. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Scallops with upward 
breakouts function as continuations of the prevailing (upward) price trend. 
Downward breakouts act as reversals of that uptrend with 10% sprinkled into 
the mix that act as continuations of a downward price trend. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Upward breakouts see reversals 
outperforming continuations, and downward breakouts see the reverse. 

You can use this information to help give your trading an edge. Most 
likely, you'll be trading this pattern in a bull market and your scallop will have 
an upward breakout. Thus, look for the pattern in a downward price trend, 
where the stock is itching to rise. Make sure the market and industry are trend- 
ing higher before taking a position. 


Table 57.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 1,361 409 284 
Reversal (R), continuation 11% R, 89% C 15% R, 85% C 90% R, 10% C 

(C) occurrence 
Reversal, continuation 45% R, 42% C 28% R, 23% C -14% R, -18% C 

performance 
Average rise or decline 42% 23% -15% 
Standard & Poor's 11% -2% -1% 

500 change 
Days to ultimate 229 67 52 

high or low 
How many 61% 40% 27% 


change trend? 


Statistics 877 


Average rise or decline. Notice how the average rise in bear markets, 
at 23%, is substantially less than the 42% rise in bull markets. The difference 
may be due to the market trend, where bear markets hold down bullish stocks. 
I guess it’s like trying to light a fire when the wood is wet (unless the wetness 
is due to starter fluid, of course). 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Notice how the large up move in the 
S&P (11% rise) helped scallops with upward breakouts in bull markets perform 
(42% rise). Bear markets (2% decline) held down the scallop’s price rise (23%) 
in the middle column. The results reinforce the belief that you should trade 
in the direction of the prevailing market trend and avoid countertrend trades. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Compare the 229 days it took scallops 
in bull markets to climb 42% with the 67 days in bear markets to climb 23%. 
Prorated, the bear market rise is 1.9 times faster than the bull market. Both 
have price rising, too. 

Let’s compare stocks that drop in bull markets with those that rise. I found 
that the drop is 1.6 times faster than the rise. 

These findings are not unique to ascending scallops. Price moves faster in 
bear markets than in bull ones. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many scallops see 
price rise more than 20% after the breakout. Values above 50% are delish, so 
upward breakouts in bull markets are solid. The other two columns need work. 
The average for downward breakouts in bull markets for all chart pattern types 
is 28%, so scallops fall short of that benchmark, too. 

Table 57.3 shows failure rates for ascending scallops. Read the table this 
way. For upward breakouts in bull markets, 11% of stocks failed to see price 
rise more than 5% after the breakout. The failure rate more than doubles to 
21% for scallops failing to see price rise more than 10%. 

Notice how the failure rates climb. They double for moves from 5% to 
10% and show steady increases thereafter. Also notice how the failure rates 


Table 57.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
or Decline (%) Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 149 or 11% 73 or 18% 66 or 23% 
10 133 or 21% 75 or 36% 60 or 44% 
15 115 or 29% 50 or 48% 46 or 61% 
20 133 or 39% 46 or 60% 34 or 73% 
25 97 or 46% 39 or 69% 25 or 81% 
30 103 or 54% 26 or 76% 21 or 89% 
35 68 or 59% 21 or 81% 12 or 93% 
50 178 or 72% 40 or 90% 16 or 99% 
75 171 or 84% 20 or 95% 4 or 100% 


Over 75 214 or 100% 19 or 100% 0 or 100% 


878 — Scallops, Ascending 


increase from the left column to the right one. I’m not sure of the significance 
of that, but it caught my attention. 

Table 57.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. This row tells how often a scallop will break out 
upward or downward, sorted by the market condition (bull or bear). Upward 
breakouts happen frequently because price at the end of the pattern is at the 
top of it rather than at the bottom of it. So expect an upward breakout. 

Yearly position, performance. Because the scallop is tall, you'll find 
more breakouts near the yearly high than the low (for bull markets with upward 
breakouts, we have sample counts near yearly high: 1,105 patterns; middle: 175 
patterns; and low: 40). With over a thousand patterns with breakouts near the 
yearly high, the 42% rise is robust and it matches the average rise for the chart 
pattern (Table 57.2). 


Table 57.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 


Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 

Breakout direction 83% up 74% up 17% down 

Performance of breakouts L 39%, M L 34%, M L-17%, M 
occurring near the 12-month 45%, H 42% 25%, H 22% -14%, H-12% 
low (L), middle (M), 
or high (H) 

Throwbacks/pullbacks 68% 64% 64% 
occurrence 

Average time to throwback/ 6% in 6 days 8% in 6 days -7% in 6 days 
pullback peaks 

Average time to throwback/ 12 days 11 days 12 days 
pullback ends 

Average rise/decline for 42% 23% -15% 
patterns with throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 

Average rise/decline for patterns 43% 25% -14% 
without throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 

Percentage price resumes trend 80% 65% 57% 

Performance with 40% 21% -16% 
breakout day gap 

Performance without 43% 24% -15% 
breakout day gap 


Average gap size $0.43 $0.34 $0.38 


Statistics 879 


The numbers suggest, however, that those with breakouts in the mid- 
dle third of the yearly price range outperform. The other two columns prefer 
those patterns near the yearly low, but they will be difficult to find (too rare). 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks happen twice in 
every three trades, on average. When they do occur, it takes 11 or 12 days for 
the stock to return to the breakout price. 

In two out of three columns, a throwback or pullback hurts performance, 
but the performance differences are slight. However, this finding matches 
what we see for other chart pattern types where a throwback or pullback hurts 
performance. Often the performance difference is by a significant amount, too. 

After a throwback or pullback completes, price resumes trending in the 
breakout direction most often as the table shows. 

Gaps. Performance improves if scallops do mot have a gap appear on the 
breakout day (except for downward breakouts in bull markets). That’s different 
from trading lore and from the results of other chart pattern types. 

Table 57.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns outperform short ones in all market conditions and 
breakout directions. Height is an important tool to gauge likely performance. 
Measure the height from the highest high to the lowest low in the scallop and 
then divide by the breakout price (which is either the highest high or lowest 


Table 57.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 43% 27% -16% 
Short pattern performance 41% 19% -13% 
Median height as 18.2% 22.7% 18.7% 

a percentage of 

breakout price 
Narrow pattern 40% 23% -14% 

performance 
Wide pattern performance 44% 24% -15% 
Median width 41 days 36 days 37 days 
Short and narrow 40% 21% -13% 

performance 
Short and wide 43% 17% -13% 

performance 
Tall and wide performance 45% 27% -17% 
Tall and narrow 41% 28% -16% 


performance 


880 — Scallops, Ascending 


low in the scallop). If the result is higher than the median shown in the table, 
then you have a tall scallop. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones in each col- 
umn, too. I used the median length as the separator between wide and narrow. 
However, the performance difference is highest in bull markets with upward 
breakouts. 

Height and width combinations. The combination of height and width 
usually follows the individual traits of height and width but not always. Avoid 
trading short scallops (either wide or narrow). 

Table 57.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression to determine the volume trend. 
Ascending scallops frequently show a rising volume trend. Most chart pattern 
types show receding volume. Don’t discard a scallop just because it has a down- 
ward volume trend. 

Rising/Falling volume. Scallop performance varies depending on the 
volume trend, as the table shows. If volume is important to you, then consult 
the table to see which market and breakout direction will give you the best 
chance of a winning trade. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume propels a stock farther 
than a breakout on weak volume, according to the performance numbers in 
the table. I used the 30-day average (leading to, but not including the breakout 
day) as the separator between heavy and light. 

Table 57.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. Upward break- 
outs will see high rates of a stop being triggered if the stop is placed at the top 
of the scallop, and downward breakouts will see the bottom of the pattern trig- 
gering a stop frequently. That’s common sense, of course. 

Because an ascending scallop can be tall, you’ll want to change the poten- 
tial loss into a percentage of the current price. Many traders try to limit losses 
to 8%, so if yow’re predicting a loss of 25%, then either move the stop closer or 
consider picking a different stock. You might try using a volatility-based stop, 
too. See the Glossary for details. 


Table 57.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 71% up 74% up 69% up 
Rising volume trend 41% 24% -15% 

performance 
Falling volume trend 44% 21% -14% 

performance 
Heavy breakout volume 43% 24% -16% 

performance 
Light breakout volume 40% 21% -12% 


performance 


Statistics 881 


Table 57.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 80% 80% 0% 
Middle 15% 12% 10% 
Pattern bottom 2% 1% 75% 


Table 57.8 shows the performance over three decades. Because bear 
markets only happened in the 2000s, they are not included in the statistics. 

Performance over time. Upward breakouts did well in the 2000s, and 
downward breakouts show the worst performance during that decade. 

Failures over time. The failure rate over the last three decades (upward 
breakouts) has been consistent for scallops even though the performance shows 
a higher variation from decade to decade. 

Table 57.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Comparatively few ascending scallops bust. 
That’s probably because the pattern is so tall. Let’s imagine that a scallop has 
an upward breakout. A bust occurs when price rises no more than 10% above 
the breakout, reverses, and drops all that way down to close below the bottom 
of the scallop. 

Busted downward breakouts follow a reverse pattern. Price breaks out 
downward and drops no more than 10%, reverses, and closes above the top of 
the scallop to bust the chart pattern. 

I would expect downward breakouts in bull markets to show higher bust 
rates than upward breakouts, which is what the table shows. I would also expect 
upward breakouts in bear markets to bust often. 

Busted occurrence. | sorted the bust types into three bins: single, dou- 
ble, and more than two busts (triple+). Most of the time, the stock will single 
bust. Again, that’s probably because the pattern is so tall. 


Table 57.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 38% -15% 
2000s 54% -13% 
2010s 42% -16% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 11% 24% 
2000s 10% 22%* 
2010s 12% 22%* 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


882 = Scallops, Ascending 


Table 57.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 210 or 15% 119 or 29% 99 or 35% 
Single bust count 125 or 60% 100 or 84% 76 or 77% 
Double bust count 69 or 33% 15 or 13% 4 or 4% 
Triple+ bust count 16 or 8% 4 or 3% 19 or 19% 
Performance for all -15% -20% 38% 
busted patterns 
Single busted performance -21% -22% 48% 
Non-busted performance -15% -19% 42% 


Busted and non-busted performance. With these three rows, I wanted 
to compare if busted patterns perform better than non-busted ones. The table 
shows that single busted scallops (which happen most often) beat the non- 
busted counterparts. 

The tricky part is to pick a scallop that busts only once. I haven’t found a 
reliable way to determine how many times a stock will bust. Perhaps looking at 
the historical record to see how wavy the stock looks might help. After all, if a 
stock has been trending higher in a near-straight-line run for years, you might 
conclude there’s a good chance it’ll single bust. A stock that has a history of 
making large price swings might bust more than once. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 57.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The first trading tactic is to determine how far 
price is likely to move once the scallop completes. This gauge is called the 
measure rule because it involves measuring the scallop’s height and applying it 
to the breakout point. 

‘To use the measure rule, calculate the height by subtracting the lowest 
low reached in the bowl from the high reached on the right side of the scallop. 
For upward breakouts, add the height to the top of the scallop to get a target. 
For downward breakouts, subtract the height from the lowest low. 

An example makes the calculation clear. Consider the ascending scallop 
that forms during late September as shown in Figure 57.5. Apply the measure 
rule to this scallop by subtracting the formation base from the right side high. 
Point B shows the pattern’s low at 12.50, and the right side high, point A, is 16. 
The difference of 3.50 is the height. Add the height to the right-side high 
(point A) to get the target price of 19.50. Price meets the target in late April 


Trading Tactics 883 


Table 57.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the height of the scallop by taking the difference between the 
highest high and the lowest low in the pattern. For upward breakouts, 
add the difference to the highest high. For downward breakouts, sub- 
tract the difference from the lowest low. The result is the price target. 
The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches the 
target based on various heights. 


Handle Expect price to retrace a portion of the scallop after it completes (but 
this is not always the case, and the retrace can include the entire 
height of the scallop so that price breaks out downward). 


Buy point Take a position in the stock once price closes above the top of the 
scallop (an upward breakout). Performance doesn’t suggest trading 
a downward breakout. 


Stop location See Table 57.7 for stop placement. 


Even ends Scallops with near-even start and end prices suggest a trend ending. 
Scallops In a rising price trend, some scallops tend to become shorter and 
in a series narrower. If the start and end prices of the pattern are near the 


same value, then the uptrend may be nearing an end. 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 


Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half 80% 61% 57% 
height target 
Percentage reaching full 62% 35% 29% 
height target 
Percentage reaching 2x height 39% 14% 8% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 27% 6% 2% 


(not shown on the chart). If the scallop breaks out downward, then subtract 
the difference from the scallop’s low (point B) to get the target price. In such a 
case, the target would be 9 (12.50 — 3.50). 

Let’s use Table 57.3 as a sanity check. For a downward breakout, we pre- 
dict a drop to 9 from 12.50. Does that sound reasonable? That’s a 28% drop. 
The table says that in bull markets 46% will fail to see price drop more than 
25%, and 54% will fail to drop more than 30%. Let’s split the difference and 
call the failure rate 50%. Half the patterns will fail to drop more than about 
28%. That’s a high failure rate. 

Let’s return to Table 57.10. How often does the measure rule work? The 
bottom portion of the table shows the success rate using various heights in 
the calculation. In our example above, we used the full height. The scallop 
appeared in a bull market and has an upward breakout. The table says the 


884 — Scallops, Ascending 


measure rule will work, on average, 62% of the time. If you cut the height in 
half (please use a sharp blade) and apply it to the formula, it should work 80% 
of the time. 

Handle. Once a scallop completes, price declines (usually, to form a han- 
dle). It retraces all or a part of the gains made as the scallop developed. Some- 
times it begins building another scallop. 

In the figure, for example, you can see that the retrace after the first scal- 
lop brings price down to the bowl of the next scallop at 14.25. The retrace after 
the November scallop sees price return to near the prior bowl’s low (B). 

Buy point. After price finishes declining in the handle (assuming it does 
retrace only a portion of the scallop), consider buying the stock. 

Stop location. Table 57.7 shows various locations for stop placement. 
Because the pattern can be quite tall, be sure to change the potential loss into 
a percentage of the current price. If the value is too high, then either move the 
stop or look for a different chart pattern. 

Even ends. In a series of ascending scallops in a single trend, many times 
the highest scallop in the series will look like a rounded turn or double top 
with the start and end of the scallop sharing almost the same price. A down- 
ward breakout may follow immediately or a trend change will occur soon after. 

Scallops in a series. I looked at consecutive scallops in a rising price 
trend and found that they tended to get narrower and shorter the higher up 
the price trend they appeared. Figures 57.1 and 57.3 show examples of this. 

I have seen scallops get wider as they climb, too, so the findings vary from 
stock to stock. If you see a scallop appear after a long uptrend and it seems wnu- 
sually wide (rare) or narrow (more common), the end of the trend may be near. 
Consider looking elsewhere for a more promising trade. What does unusually 
wide or narrow mean? Use the width values from Table 57.5 as guidance. Since 
scallops are plentiful, search for them in the stock you intend to trade and in 
other stocks in the same industry to get a better feel for the typical scallop 
width and height. 


Experience 


I traded one ascending scallop in JLG Industries LG), so let me tell you 
about it. I show it in Figure 57.4. The figure looks complicated, so let’s tear it 
apart so you will understand my decisions. 

A small pennant appears at D, and it sits atop a flagpole that started at 
G. The idea behind pennants is that the move after the pennant will mirror 
the height of the flagpole. It didn’t happen in this case, though. Price climbed 
only to F 

On 11 October, I decided to buy the stock, and point A shows the day of 
purchase. The stock filled at a split-adjusted price of 8.22. 


Experience 885 


JLG Industries (JLG) 


12 
A! bay ar 
\ \ f 
B Vt bs, [ ing 11 
j \ 10 
FA ip Wh, . 
/ g/ th Met! My AM 9 
wi / h/ ¥* yt “Wh, 
yD ya / | 8 
4 E YY 
{ AAC 
*-——Sto 
” yy Pp 
\, hy we “yy ok G ‘ 
Uf "i ee Yau 
6 
5 
04 = Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec JanO5 Feb Mar Apr May = Jun 


Figure 57.4 This ascending scallop led to a timely trade exit when the company 
announced earnings. 


Why buy there? From my notebook: “This is approaching the 62% 
retrace from the low at 7.11 to the high at 8.99. I think, after three down days 
and perhaps another today, the stock will move up tomorrow. More traders 
will return from the Columbus Day holiday and help the market move up. 
This [stock] may move horizontally, gathering strength for the next up move.” 

The 62% value retraces the climb from G to F as price slides back down 
toward A. The bottom of the bowl sits on the 62% retrace value of 7.82. 
My prediction of the stock moving higher was premature by 3 days. 

I placed a stop-loss order at 7.22. “Below the gap, below the pennant 
apex, and below the 62% retrace, but the loss is large: 12%.” I show the origi- 
nal stop location as the lowest horizontal line in October, near G. 

The upside target was 8.73 (17.45 split unadjusted), just below round- 
number resistance at 17.50 (split unadjusted) and “below the tail’s high at 
8.99.” The tail is price bar F. If you look closely, you will see how price opens 
and closes near the bottom of that day. It’s a one-day reversal (gravestone doji 
in candle-speak), signaling a downward move. 

On 28 October, I raised the stop to 7.74, which is line E, just below the 
bottom of the bowl. 

A few weeks later (16 November), I raised the stop again to 8.22, shown at 
H. That was two days before B. I tucked the stop below the slight a minor low 
at H. With the price at 10.07 and the stop at 8.22, that’s a potential 18% loss, 
which is ten percentage points higher than I like to see. 

When I placed the stop, it was clear an ascending scallop had formed 
between points F and B. 


886 — Scallops, Ascending 


The day after the stock peaked, I sold. Here are my notes: “Sell rea- 
son: Hitting a round number (20, split unadjusted). On monthly scale, it’s at 
a horizontal trendline of a right-angled and descending broadening pattern 
[not shown]. I anticipate a drop to 9.00 (50% retrace of prior up move), then 
a punch through the trendline. This has been trending upward for too long 
without a retrace. Lots of overhead resistance to prevent price from moving 
up much higher. Volume is dropping even as price rises. This may coast up to 
10.50 (site of the old horizontal trendline) before collapsing. The ascending 
scallop will retrace, forming a handle. I want to sidestep the retrace and buy 
again after its drops.” 

The stock filled at 9.93, the opening price for candle B. On that day, 
probably after the market closed, the company announced earnings that the 
market didn’t like. The stock gapped open lower the next day (combination 
breakaway and exhaustion gap), reaching a low 22% below my sell price. 

I don’t even think I was aware of the earnings release because I made no 
mention of it in my trading notebook. 

On the trade, I made 21% in 39 days. Thank goodness I sold when I did. 


¢ Lesson: I used the potential retrace (handle) from an ascending scallop 
to signal a timely exit to a trade on the day of an earnings announce- 
ment. Be aware of when earnings reports are due because they can 
affect the stock dramatically. 


Sample Trade 


Kristy was intrigued by the scallop shown on the left in Figure 57.5. The 
irregular bottom shape in the bowl concerned her as did the falling volume 
trend. But she liked the prospects for the restaurant company, and her funda- 
mental analysis was thorough, tasty, and filling. 

Before she bought the stock at point C, she computed the estimated gain 
and compared it to the risk of loss. The targeted rise was to 18.75 (she calcu- 
lated using the right-side peak 3 days earlier). The risk point was 14, the high 
of the left side and a massive support area reached in early 1994. At her pur- 
chase point of 15.25, the risk was 1.25 (15.25 — 14) and the potential reward 
was 3.50 (18.75 — 15.25). The nearly three-to-one ratio was high enough to 
risk a trade. 

I wrinkled my nose. 

“What?” she asked. 

“T don’t like risk-reward ratios.” 

“Why? ” 

“Often the trades I take have lousy ratios, but after I sell, the reward 
comes in many times the risk. If I obeyed the ratio, P’'d have skipped the trade.” 


Sample Trade 887 


CKE Restaurants, Inc (Restaurant, NYSE, CKR) 


-19 
Ascending Scallop Ascending Scallop 
=. ==" «- —- -— -—;% -18 
i 
Ascending A ‘a hy [he ie 
Scall 
callop : } ‘l bly I wd hn h Hy 
Hu ill 
, ut | -15 
li ' Support Level 
I ma 
Cc 
1 | ! | ‘de 13 
yt! ply \I! 
-12 


eee Gee | ee 


Aug 95 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 57.5 Three consecutive ascending scallops. As described in the Sample 
Trade, Kristy bought the stock at point C once price rose above the top of the 
ascending scallop. The last scallop has a V-shaped bowl and a right rim that almost 
makes it to the high of the left side. She sold at point D. 


“What you’re saying is that you’re either lousy at estimating how far 
price is going to move or you hold on longer than expected.” 

I shrugged. “Does anyone really know how far price will rise or fall? Tell 
me more about your trade.” 

She felt gratified when price closed at the high for the day, suggesting 
price the following day would move higher still. When she looked at the stock 
the next day, price did reach a new high but closed lower. 

Over the next two weeks, as she posted her daily quotes for the stock, the 
declining price trend worried her, but not unduly so. Kristy recognized the 
rounding turn of another scallop forming and saw that her stop held. 

Day by day she followed the stock and did not like the third scallop in the 
series (the rightmost one). The bowl shape was irregular with an unconvinc- 
ing volume pattern. When price stopped at the old high before collapsing, she 
believed the rise was at an end. “I pulled the plug on the operation at 16.75,” 
shown as point D in the figure, when price pierced an up trendline from the 
bowl low (not shown, but it begins in January 1996 and hugs the minor lows 
going upward toward D). 

In the short term, Kristy was right in that price headed lower. It moved 
down until reaching the low of the bowl but then rebounded. By mid-June, 
the stock had nearly doubled, reaching a high of 28.75, 10 points above the 
target price of 18.75. Even so, on her 1,000 shares, she cleared almost $1,500 
on the trade. 


58 


Scallops, Ascending 
and Inverted 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Looks like a backward and upside-down J. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish Intermediate-term bullish 
continuation continuation 
Performance rank 14 out of 39 9 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 9% 9% 
Average rise 45% 28% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Throwbacks 66% 67% 
Percentage meeting 64% 53% 


price target 


Years ago, after looking at ascending and descending scallops, I wondered 
whether they had inverted counterparts and what they might look like. It did 
not take long before I discovered the ascending and inverted variety. I thought 
it showed great promise and studied it briefly before setting it aside. This 
chapter takes a closer look at the pattern’s performance. 


888 


Tour 889 


The chart pattern looks like a backward and upside-down J. The break- 
even failure rate is low, 9%, giving it a rank of 7 in bull markets and 4 in bear 
markets, where a rank of 1 (best) has the fewest failures. The average rise is 
28% in bear markets, but that’s good enough to rank the pattern ninth for 
performance. 


Tour 


What does an ascending and inverted scallop look like? Figure 58.1 shows 
two examples. The left scallop begins at point A and ends at B; both are 
minor lows that mark changes in the short-term price trend. The volume 
trend is unremarkable except for a slight downward tilt. The second scallop 
starts at B and ends at C. The volume trend of this scallop is dome-shaped as 
shown. 

I like to see a rounded top on the scallop, but a nubbin or two sticking 
out is fine. Sometimes the rounded shape appears not as a line connecting the 
highs, but connecting the lows. The key is that it looks like an upside-down 
and backward J, tilted to the right. 


Merck and Co, Inc (Drug, NYSE, MRK) 


96 Oct Nov Dec Jan97 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 58.1 After a long-term uptrend, price retraces and forms the first scallop, 
starting at point A and ending at B. The second scallop begins at B and ends at C. 
Note that the horizontal distance from A to B is wider than B to C. This difference 
is typical for multiple scallops in a single uptrend. 


890 Scallops, Ascending and Inverted 


Identification Guidelines 


After manually searching through hundreds of inverted scallops, I developed 
the identification guidelines that appear in Table 58.1. 

Appearance. Look at Figure 58.2 for an example. Price moves up smartly 
at the pattern’s start in late October and then rounds over at the top of the scal- 
lop. The pattern looks like the letter J flipped upside-down and reversed. 

Because scallops often don’t confirm in a sustained downward price trend 
(except at the turn from bear to bull, like that shown in Figure 58.1 for the AB 
pattern), you'll find them most often in a rising trend. 

Daily chart. I used the daily chart to find the pattern, but I am sure they 
come out like worms after a heavy rain on most any time scale. The longer 
ones appear on the weekly chart, but I did not check the intraday chart to see 
what they looked like or how they perform. 

Smooth top. I ignored those patterns with a sharp or pointed top, but 
did allow a few that had a one-day tail shooting out the top. They reminded 
me of a single tree on a hilltop. As long as the hilltop looks smooth, then your 
selection is fine. 

At the round top of the pattern, sometimes a line connecting the daily 
low prices and not the daily highs appears smoother. You can see (but it might 
be difficult) this situation in Figure 58.2. Two short trees peek out from the 
hilltop at the top of the scallop and the pattern would appear better if a log- 
ger came along and harvested them. If you connect the low prices, the turn is 
smoother than if you connect the high prices. 

Retrace. The pattern begins at point A, tops out at B, and retraces to end 
at C. The average retrace from B to C when compared to the AB length is 54%. 


Table 58.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price trends up, then rounds over at the top, forming an inverted and 
backward J. 

Daily chart Use the daily chart to find the pattern, although the larger ones also 
appear on the weekly charts. 

Smooth top Look for daily high prices that, when connected, form a smooth turn. 
Larger patterns may not be as smooth because you are connecting 
minor highs. 

Retrace The rounded top portion of the pattern usually retraces about 50% of 
the prior up move. Price must not drop below the pattern’s start. 

Breakout Upward when price closes above the top of the scallop pattern. Fewer 

direction than 10% break out downward. Ignore those with downward 
breakouts. 


Confirmation Price must close above the highest high in the pattern. Only then is the 
pattern valid. 


Identification Guidelines 891 


Merrill Lynch and Company (Securities Brokerage, NYSE, MER) 


etal as | 


ve a Wes 
I 


May Jun jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99_ Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 58.2 This scallop appears rounder if you connect the low prices instead 
of the high prices. 


This retrace amount varies widely but in no case must the low at C drop below 
A. If it does, then look for another scallop. 

Breakout direction. Ascending and inverted scallops can break out in 
any direction, but you'll find most (over 90%) break out upward. That happens 
when price closes above the top of the scallop. 

A downward breakout would see price drop all the way down to close 
below A, the bottom of the scallop. Scallops with downward breakouts are too 
few to be worth serious consideration. For that reason, I don’t include them in 
this chapter. 

Confirmation price. Always wait for confirmation, that is, for price to 
close above the pattern’s high. Only then does the pattern become a valid scal- 
lop with an upward breakout. 

Figure 58.3 shows an example of domed-shaped volume from October 
to December that starts when the middle scallop begins but finishes before 
the scallop ends. This action is typical but should not influence pattern iden- 
tification. 

I included this picture because the width of the three inverted and ascend- 
ing scallops narrows as price climbs. Such narrowing gives traders a clue to the 
trend end. If you see a narrow scallop forming, consider whether the upward 
trend is long in the tooth and due to reverse. Then trade accordingly. ‘This 
stock climbed to 46 in mid-June 2002 before tumbling to almost 30 in July 
(not shown). 


892 = Scallops, Ascending and Inverted 


Michaels Stores (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, MIK) 


et 
ee 


W 


y ft 
hy 


(14) 


Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan02 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 58.3 Notice how scallops become shorter and narrower as price rises. 


Focus on Failures 


How does the scallop fail? Most of the problems deal with selecting patterns 
incorrectly. Identification is never easy until you become acquainted with the 
pattern, so here are two scenarios to look for. The first, shown in Figure 58.4, 
is selecting a pattern in a downtrend. 

If you are lucky, your pattern will confirm and price will rise in a long- 
term bull trend. However, you’ll want to avoid lemons like that shown in 
the figure. 

Price is falling going into the start of the pattern, then reverses, and the 
scallop builds. Price breaks out upward when it closes above the highest high 
in the scallop. Unfortunately, the market downdraft sucks price lower, and with 
overhead resistance, this trade is doomed. 

The lessons from this chart are two: First, watch the prevailing price 
trend. Select patterns in a rising price trend and avoid those in a downtrend. 
Second, always search for support and resistance zones before investing. Those 
chart patterns are the most important as they help you gauge the expected 
price move in either direction. My book, Trading Classic Chart Patterns (Wiley, 
2002), gives a good tutorial on support and resistance and includes perfor- 
mance statistics. 

Figure 58.5 shows the second type of failure. Two of the three patterns 
are valid ascending and inverted scallops. Which one is the dud? You might 
guess the first one, and I admit the top looks more like a flat rectangle than a 


Focus on Failures 893 


National Semiconductor Corp (Semiconductor, NYSE, NSM) 


Overhead Resistance 


00 Feb May Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov’ Dec Jan0O1 Feb May Apr 


Figure 58.4 This is a valid pattern because it confirms, but the bearish trend 
should give a trader pause. Coupled with overhead resistance, this trade was a 
nonstarter. 


Pulte Homes, Inc (Homebuilding, NYSE, PHM) 


High at 
| 
at if iy 
ad jul" | | 


Vv, 


h aruactih af 
i Ma Wt Mh oy 


r" 


00 Feb Mar Apr = May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 58.5 What is wrong with the highest scallop? The pattern never confirms 
before price drops below the pattern’s low. 


894 Scallops, Ascending and Inverted 


rounded scallop. The variation in patterns is so wide that you have to be flex- 
ible; you can always ignore the questionable ones and trade the sure things. 

The middle pattern has a top that looks like a symmetrical triangle. It’s 
not as rounded as I like to see, but it’s fine. 

The last and highest scallop has no rounded turn to speak of. If you 
ignore the up-sloping (instead of rounded looking) top, the right scallop is the 
dud because it does not confirm. To confirm, price must close above the top of 
the scallop for an upward breakout. Although downward breakouts do occur, 
I suggest you ignore them. The other two patterns are strange-looking but fine 
as inverted scallops. 


Statistics 


Table 58.2 shows general statistics for the ascending and inverted scallop. 

Number found. I found a massive 2,191 scallops swimming in 483 stocks 
with the first caught in December 1991 and the most recent in December 2019. 
Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. Although 
I catalogued downward breakouts in both bull and bear markets, they were too 
few to present here. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Most scallops behaved as 
continuations of the prevailing price trend. About a third (31% in bull markets 
and 38% in bear markets) acted as reversals. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Scallops acting as reversals 
performed better than did those acting as continuations, especially in bear 
markets. You might want to keep this in mind to give yourself a trading edge. 

Average rise. The ascending and inverted scallop is a bullish pattern. 
Scallops in bull markets perform almost twice as well as bear market ones, even 
though both have upward breakouts. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In bull markets, the S&P 500 index 
climbed an average of 13%. This figure compares to an average rise of 45% for 


Table 58.2 
General Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,776 290 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 31% R, 69% C 38% R, 62% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 47% R, 45% C 32% R, 26% C 
Average rise 45% 28% 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% -2% 

Days to ultimate high 264 102 


How many change trend? 62% 56% 


Statistics 895 


scallops over the same period. The strongly bullish market may be responsible 
for the large average rise of scallops. 

In bear markets, the index declined 2% compared with a rise of 28% 
for inverted scallops. The market probably held down scallop performance in 
individual stocks. 

Days to ultimate high. How long did it take price to reach the ultimate 
high? In bull markets, the rise took 9 months. In bear markets, it took less than 
half that, or about 3.5 months. If you crunch the numbers, the rise in bear mar- 
kets is 60% faster than the one in bull markets. Fasten your seatbelt. Giddyap. 

How many change trend? This row is a count of how many scallops see 
price rise more than 20% after the breakout. I consider values over 50% to be 
superb, and both bull and bear markets beat that benchmark. It suggests that 
price trends after the breakout, but there’s no guarantee of that. 

Table 58.3 shows failure rates for ascending and inverted scallops dis- 
played as a frequency distribution of gains. For example, if your cost of trading 
is 5%, what I call the breakeven failure rate, how many scallops fail to see price 
rise more than 5%? Answer: 9%. 

How many fail to see price rise over 25%? About half (46% in bull mar- 
kets and 58% in bear markets). Notice that bull market failures are fewer than 
bear market ones (they diverge at a 15% maximum rise). 

Like other chart patterns, notice how the failure rates start small and rise 
quickly. They more than double from 9% to 21% as the maximum price rise 
changes from 5% to 10%. 

The key to trading chart patterns is to find a pattern with a low failure 
rate and high average rise. That way you stand a better chance of making a 
profit at lower risk. 

Table 58.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 


Table 58.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 168 or 9% 26 or 9% 
10 211 or 21% 34 or 21% 
15 166 or 31% 38 or 34% 
20 135 or 38% 29 or 44% 
25 138 or 46% 41 or 58% 
30 109 or 52% 32 or 69% 
35 106 or 58% 15 or 74% 
50 207 or 70% 30 or 84% 
75 210 or 82% 28 or 94% 


Over 75 326 or 100% 17 or 100% 


896 _— Scallops, Ascending and Inverted 


Table 58.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


95% up 
L 41%, M 50%, 
H 44% 


91% up 
L 32%*, M 29%, 
H 27% 


Throwbacks occurrence 66% 67% 
Average time to throwback peaks 6% in 7 days 8% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 13 days 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 43% 26% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 49% 32% 
Percentage price resumes trend 79% 75% 
Performance with breakout day gap 47% 26% 
Performance without breakout day gap 45% 29% 
Average gap size $0.56 $0.41 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


Breakout direction. As the table shows, almost all of the patterns have 
upward breakouts. Those with downward breakouts were too few to catalog, 
as I mentioned. 

Yearly position, performance. The best performance comes from scal- 
lops breaking out in the middle of the yearly price range, especially if you 
ignore the low-sample-count bear market value. 

Throwbacks. Throwbacks occur in two-thirds of the trades. When 
they do occur, it takes a stock 12 or 13 days, on average, to return to the 
breakout price. 

When a scallop throws back, performance suffers. For example, scal- 
lops with throwbacks in bull markets have rises that average 43%. Without a 
throwback, the rise averages 49%. This trend is typical for chart pattern types, 
as if a throwback robs upward momentum and performance suffers. 

Once a throwback completes, the stock resumes rising about 75% of the 
time. If you hold onto a stock during a throwback, it will often recover and 
grow up to achieve great things. 

Gaps. Breakout day gaps improve performance in bull markets, but hurt 
it in bear markets. It always bothers me when the two markets contradict each 
other like you see in the table. I will say that most of the time, a gap helps per- 
formance (in most chart pattern types). Not only that, but because I used the 
opening price the day after the gap appears, you can buy into the situation and 
participate in the better performance. 


Statistics 897 


Table 58.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. To calculate this 
for your scallop, compute the height of the pattern from highest high to low- 
est low. Divide the height by the breakout price and compare the result to the 
median in the table. If your value is larger than the median, then you have a tall 
pattern and it’s party time. 

Width. Narrow patterns perform better in bear markets, but show no 
performance difference in bull markets. I used the median length to determine 
whether a scallop was narrow or wide. 

Height and width combinations. These results are weird because in 
bear markets, tall scallops outperform and narrow ones outperform, but the 
combination of tall and narrow places second for performance. 

Table 58.6 shows volume-related statistics. 


Table 58.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 47% 31% 
Short pattern performance 43% 26% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 17.4% 21.4% 
Narrow pattern performance 45% 30% 
Wide pattern performance 45% 27% 
Median width 37 days 33 days 
Short and narrow performance 42% 29% 
Short and wide performance 46% 17% 
Tall and wide performance 45% 32% 
Tall and narrow performance 51% 30% 
Table 58.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 70% down 69% down 
Rising volume trend performance 48% 29% 
Falling volume trend performance 44% 28% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 46% 28% 


Light breakout volume performance 44% 31% 


898 — Scallops, Ascending and Inverted 


Volume trend. I used linear regression to prove volume trends down- 
ward across the scallop pattern. Don’t throw out a scallop because it has an 
upward price trend, however. Why? 

Rising/Falling volume. Answer: Patterns with a rising volume trend do 
better after the breakout than do those with a falling volume trend. 

Breakout day volume. The effect of breakout volume on performance is 
mixed, depending on the market conditions. Consult the table for more infor- 
mation and tell °em Tom sent you. 

Table 58.7 shows how often price returned to one of three locations in 
the scallop as price climbed to the ultimate high. 

If you were to place a stop at the top of the pattern, you’d likely be taken 
out of the trade. Place it at the bottom of the scallop and you’d probably be 
safe, but if not, your spouse might ask, “Where’s the money, Honey?” In other 
words, make sure to change a potential loss into a percentage of the current 
price to see how upset your spouse will be if you have a losing trade. 

Table 58.8 shows the performance over three decades. The table and 
statistics don’t include bear markets because they only happened in the 2000s. 

Performance over time. The 2000s showed the best performance and 
the 2010s the worst. The results make me wonder if the 2020s will show even 
worse performance. Any ideas? 

Failures over time. Failures increased steadily from the 1990s, which 
doesn’t bode well for the 2020s if the trend continues. 


Table 58.7 
How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 77% 76% 
Middle 15% 11% 
Pattern bottom 2% 1% 

Table 58.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 43% 
2000s 54% 
2010s 38% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 7% 
2000s 9% 


2010s 12% 


Trading Tactics 899 


Table 58.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 297 or 17% 47 or 16% 
Single bust count 178 or 60% 35 or 74% 
Double bust count 82 or 28% 10 or 21% 
Triple+ bust count 37 or 12% 2 or 4% 
Performance for all busted patterns -15% -19% 
Single busted performance -21% -24% 
Non-busted performance -15% -20%* 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


Table 58.9 shows busted pattern performance. I’m not thrilled about 
upward breakouts which bust. The downward move isn’t as mouthwatering as 
a busted downward breakout (for other chart pattern types) that sees price soar 
50% or more on average. 

Busted patterns count. Comparatively few patterns bust (which is 
good news). 

Busted occurrence. Of those patterns that bust, the vast majority are 
single busts with double busts coming in a distant second. That trend may 
sound obvious, but with some patterns, double busts place third. 

Busted and non-busted performance. The last three lines in the table 
compare the performance of busted patterns with non-busted ones. Single 
busted patterns almost always beat the other two combinations, and that’s what 
we see here. The problem with trying to take advantage of this finding is that 
you have to pick a pattern that single busts. There’s a good chance you will 
according to the upper portion of the table, but it’s not a sure thing. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 58.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to find a price target. 
Figure 58.6 shows an example. Compute the formation height by subtracting 
the scallop low (point A) from its high (E). Add the difference to the high (E) 
to get the target price. 

In this example, the pattern low is at 3.27, and the high is at 4.61. The 
difference between the high and low gives the pattern height, or 1.34. Add the 
height to the high price to get the target: 5.95. Price climbs to that point in 
mid-March. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 
In the example cited above, the stock is in a bull market and we used the full 


900 Scallops, Ascending and Inverted 


Table 58.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule Used to find a target price. Take the difference between the scal- 


lop’s high and low. Add this difference to the scallop’s high. 
The result is the target price. The bottom portion of the table 
shows how often price reaches the target using various heights 
in the calculation. 


Search for nearby sup-  Trendlines, chart pattern boundaries, minor highs and minor 
port and resistance lows, round numbers, and horizontal consolidation regions 
all contribute to support and resistance zones. Gaps? 
Not so much. 


Wait for confirmation Buy only after price closes above the pattern’s high. 


Stop location See Table 58.7 for guidance. 
Series height and Scallops may signal the end of an uptrend if their shape gets 
width shorter or narrower. 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 81% 76% 
Percentage reaching full height target 64% 53% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 42% 22% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 29% 8% 


height in the computation. The table says the method will work 64% of the 
time on average. 

For a higher success rate, cut the height in half and add it to the price at 
E. The stock should reach the target 81% of the time, but if you were to sell 
there, you’d earn less profit than if you sold at the full-height target. 

Once you know the location of the target, convert the distance into a 
percentage of the price and see if Table 58.3 makes you gasp. For example, if 
the target is $5 away in a scallop with a $50 current price, that’s a 10% move. 
Table 58.3 says that in bear markets 21% of scallops will fail to see price rise 
10%. So you have a 79% chance of the price making at least 10%. 

Search for nearby support and resistance. Underlying support pro- 
tects your position in case the trade goes wrong. If price closes below the right 
pattern low, sell (below point B in Figure 58.6). The Sample Trade discusses 
trendline support, but you should also look for other types of support. 

Overhead resistance is one of the main reasons I avoid a trade. If there is a 
solid block of price forming a ceiling on the trade, I will look for another situation 
with better prospects. In diving board or cloud bank patterns, however, overhead 
resistance becomes the target because it’s often far above the current price. 

Wait for confirmation. Always wait for the pattern to become valid. 
That happens when price closes above the pattern’s high, and that is also the 
buy signal. 


Sample Trade 901 


Stop location. Table 58.7 shows how often price snags a stop-loss order 
on the way to finding the ultimate high. After price reaches the ultimate high, 
you're on your own. 

Series height and width. Figures 58.3 and 58.5 show examples of how 
scallops get narrower and shorter as they appear in a rising price trend. These 
changes are not true of all inverted scallops in a single uptrend, but beware 
of investing in a narrow or short scallop because it may signal a coming 
trend change. 


Sample Trade 


Robert looked at the chart shown as Figure 58.6 and liked the stock’s rising 
price trend that started in April. He watched the first scallop form in Septem- 
ber and October. The retrace of this pattern, ending at point A, was 83%— 
more than he liked, so he ignored the potential trade. “Big retraces suggest 
an especially weak technical picture, and scallops with large retraces tend to 
underperform.” 

When the second scallop formed during late October through early 
December, the retrace was a more palatable 64%. 

He ran though the identification guidelines in Table 58.1 and found the 
following: On the daily chart, the pattern was in a price uptrend, it looked like 


Bed Bath and Beyond (Retail (Special Lines), NASDAQ, BBBY) 


-7 
ae 

Bought 
BON, -5 


-3 


-1 
Apr95 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 58.6 As described in the Sample Trade, Robert bought the day after the 
pattern confirmed and sold at point D after price pierced the trendline. 


902 Scallops, Ascending and Inverted 


an inverted and backward J, the top looked rounded, and price did not drop 
below point A, the scallop’s start. Meeting those guidelines qualified the pat- 
tern as an ascending and inverted scallop. 

“The day after price closed above the scallop’s high, I bought like a 
maniac. Oops.” Price tumbled. “But I’m an experienced trader, I know all about 
throwbacks, so I wasn’t worried. Well, not too much.” Price threw back to C, 
above his stop (which was placed a nickel below point B), before rebounding. 

“T like to use trendlines as sell signals.” He drew a trendline from A to 
B and extended it upward (not shown). “Steep trends are short-lived, but the 
angle the stock was making didn’t worry me.” He redrew the trendline (shown) 
as price climbed. 

For fun, he computed the price target for the scallop, and it turned out to 
be 5.95. Price climbed through the target, pausing around 5, a round number 
and a common support and resistance zone, but eventually pushed through it. 

Price kept bumping against the trendline without piercing it until early 
June. “Then it tumbled through the trendline with meaning. Combined with 
high volume a few days earlier, it was time to pull the ripcord.” He sold the 
following day (point D). 

Robert bought at 4.90 and sold at 6.50 for a gain of 33% in about 
5 months. From that point it took over a year for price to make a new high. 


59 


Scallops, Descending 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: The price pattern looks like the letter J reversed. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish reversal 
Performance rank 29 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 14% 
Average rise 39% 
Volume trend Downward 
Throwbacks 67% 
Percentage meeting 52% 
price target 
See also Head-and-shoulders bottoms, complex; rounding 
bottoms 


903 


904 = Scallops, Descending 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish Short-term bearish 
continuation continuation 

Performance rank 12 out of 36 6 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 18% 7% 
Average drop 16% 23% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 65% 61% 
Percentage meeting 34% 33% 


price target 


The classic definition of scallops refers to the ascending variety only, where you 
sometimes find repeated saucer-shaped patterns in a rising price trend. If there 
is an ascending variety, there is probably a descending variety. I decided to find 
out and searched for them. 

Scallops may make a tasty meal, but as a chart pattern, they leave me hun- 
gry except in bear markets where the performance rank is sixth and failures are 
in the single digits. In bull markets, the failure rate is high and performance 
isn’t great, either. 

Let’s take a closer look at descending scallops to see if anything smells 
fishy (did you notice how I worked that pun in?). 


Tour 


Figure 59.1 shows three examples of descending scallops. A downward price 
trend leads to the first scallop in September, the widest of the three. The scallop 
begins with the minor high in August (point A), drops to find support at C, and 
curves upward. On the right, the first minor high on the upward retrace marks 
the end of the pattern (B). 

Descending scallops resemble the letter J reversed, with the end (B) 
approximately halfway up the distance to the start (A) in this example. For 
upward moves, a close above point B represents a breakout. For downward 
moves, a close below C, the lowest low in the pattern, is the breakout price. 

The September and December scallops have upward breakouts, but 
the February scallop breaks out downward. Since the overall price trend is 
downward, notice how the upward breakouts stall as price bumps against an 
imaginary trendline (not shown) following the price peaks starting from the far 
left. The trendline acts as overhead resistance. 


Identification Guidelines 905 


Georgia Gulf (Chemical (Basic), NYSE, GGC) 
rH 
DL A = 
"oh Ml Mh -23 
! 
\ A —22 
art, = 21 
1 B | 7 
\ \ nh, - 20 
| e"\) 8 
| | | i" 
i) Th ny Ite 


Bol 
hy i Ys 
I |! 

beh 


’ | 7 
\ ly 18 


-12 


4 ee ee 


98 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 59.1 Three descending scallops appear in a declining price trend. Notice 
how they get narrower and shorter along the trend. 


All three scallops rest on a pier of support at C. The scallop bottom is a 
common resistance zone. I say resistance because, for downward breakouts, 
price will push through the support zone, but a pullback attempt will often 
stall there, so underlying support turns into overhead resistance. In future up 
moves, price often stalls near the base of a scallop, so keep that in mind even if 
you do not trade these patterns. 

Finally, notice how this threesome tends to get narrower and shorter as 
the decline proceeds. With descending scallops, this feature is not nearly as 
pronounced as it is for ascending scallops. By that, I mean sometimes you can 
determine the trend end by seeing if the scallop gets shorter and/or narrower 
as price moves along a trend. When the AB peaks are about equal in price, the 
trend end might be near. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 59.1 shows the identification guidelines. 

Appearance. Look for a reverse J shape, with the left side of the scallop 
higher than the right. The bowl at the bottom of the pattern should appear 
smooth and rounded, not excessively rough or V shaped. Allow variations. 


906 = Scallops, Descending 


Table 59.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A reverse | shape with price much higher on the left side than on the 
right. The bowl should be a concave rounded turn. 

Price trend Look for a downward price trend leading to the scallop. Scallops do 
occur in uptrends, but that is rare. 

Ends The start and end of the pattern should not be near one another in 
price. The end (right peak) usually retraces 60% of the way up the 
left side. 

Volume Recedes. Don’t discard a scallop because the volume trend is upward. 

Breakout Usually downward but can be upward, too. An upward breakout occurs 

direction when price closes above the right rim of the pattern. A downward 


breakout has a close below the bottom of the scallop. 


‘Tall but narrow scallops may look more V shaped than wider scallops, and 
often a price spike will poke out downward. 

Price trend. The descending scallops I looked at appeared in a down- 
ward price trend just over half the time. Since descending scallops work best as 
bearish patterns, avoid trading those in an uptrend. 

Sometimes you will see a descending scallop form at the top of a long, 
upward price trend. It acts as a reversal when price breaks out downward. 
It may be worth trading; the Sample Trade explores one such trade. 

Ends. The start and end of the pattern (point A and B in Figure 59.1) 
should be far apart in price. The usual retrace, C to B, of the A-to-C distance 
is 56%. In other words, price climbs 56% of the way to A from the bowl low. 
Since this number is an average (the median is the same), allow variations, 
but the key is to avoid scallops that look like bowls—two ends at nearly the 
same price. 

Volume. I never exclude a scallop because of the volume trend, but it 
recedes from the left of the pattern to the right almost two-thirds of the time. 

Breakout direction. A quick glance at Table 59.2 will tell you that scal- 
lops like to break out downward most often. 

Figure 59.2 shows four descending scallops. You can see that the overall 
price trend is downward. It starts on the left at about 20 and saucers down to 
about 15. The descending scallops appear like reverse J patterns. The minor 
high on the right is below the minor high on the left, and between the two 
peaks is a rounded recession. You can see that the last scallop has minor highs 
that are nearly equal. This feature often suggests the declining price trend is 
nearing an end. In this case, price reaches the ultimate low in less than 2 months 
at 13.63, quite close to the last bowl low of 14.75. 

The volume trend is irregular. I have noticed a tendency for a volume 
spike to appear near the center of the scallop as price switches from moving 
down to up. You can see the spikes in late March and mid-June. 


Focus on Failures 907 


CNF Transportation Inc (Trucking/Transp. Leasing, NYSE, CNF) 
-21 


Kh, Descending Scallops —20 
Mn oe 


H Th) "al rh yn ig 
Ih tT, Fl Mal | 17 

i My ith ily — 
i | | eh Ii . Wy -1 


Feb 93 Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 59.2 Four consecutive descending scallops. 


Focus on Failures 


Descending scallops fail most often because of two other chart patterns: sup- 
port and resistance. Figure 59.3 shows the first example. The July scallop 
begins at A and ends at B. The bowl has a downward price spike, making the 
turn less smooth than I like to see (the word yack comes to mind). Volume is 
dome shaped, which is typical for descending scallops. 

After B, price moves down, and it looks like it will drop below the bowl 
low to breakout downward. Since price is declining leading to the scallop, 
down is the expected breakout direction. Instead, the stock closes above B at C 
and surprises with an upward breakout. 

Price rises to the height of A and throws back to the price at B. Over- 
head resistance is the culprit. Numerous valleys touch the resistance line and 
a solid block of horizontal price movement adds strength to the zone in Janu- 
ary to March. 

As in most throwbacks, price recovers and attempts a new high that suc- 
ceeds, but not by much. Overhead resistance is there to swat it down, and price 
drops below the pattern low. The rise from B to the resistance zone where 
price stalls measures 5%. 

Figure 59.4 shows the second example of a failure, this time with a 
downward breakout. Price does not decline far before rebounding and eventu- 
ally making a new yearly high at 113 (not shown). 

Why did this descending scallop fail? The only explanation I can offer is 
hard to justify. There is meager support announced by the February low and 


908 = Scallops, Descending 


Abbot Laboratories (Medical Supplies, NYSE, ABT) 


i Mh 
if hy ! NA 48 
hall i Nh ti i \ I | | F 7 \ j : Overhead Restance “2 
| ith Mo 
| | | i ‘i iy hy No: 43 
Wy yh f | -« 


wh 


Throwback - 39 


98 Dec Jan 99 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 59.3 Overhead resistance causes the July scallop to stall and eventually 
price turns down. The rise measures just 5%. 


Amazon.com Inc (Internet, NASDAQ, AMZN) 


> 

1 
=a 
oma 
ROD 


= 
= 


= 


i i i i 
i li | 


vil ny , | yl 
A |! 


Wh Wy I 


a a 


Mh 
yh Wy 


I Support Zone 


Breakout 
Price 


ins Pennant 


ST i} 1 1 1 Le ee ee 


Jan 99 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Zz 
° 


Figure 59.4 This scallop fails to descend far after a downward breakout. Notice 
the large price range. 


Statistics 909 


the gap in December 1998. Below that, a small pennant also provides support 
but it looks to be too far below to matter. 

If I were trading this stock and saw the downward breakout, I would 
believe that price would continue dropping. Perhaps the fundamentals explain 
the robust support that stopped the decline, but my records do not go back 
that far. Whatever the reason, proper use of stops would have saved a bundle 
when price climbed from a low of 41 in August to 113 in less than 5 months. 


Statistics 


Table 59.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found almost 3,000 scallops, but after removing down- 
ward breakouts in bear markets (which didn’t meet the minimum number for 
this edition), I was left with the ones shown in the table. I trapped the first scal- 
lop in August 1991 and the most recent in December 2018, but not all stocks 
covered the entire period, and as an added bonus, some stocks no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. As the table shows, most 
scallops act as continuations of the downward price trend, but it’s close to ran- 
dom (for downward breakouts). Reversals occur at the top of upward trends 
and during declines, whether at the bottom of the downtrend or in the middle 
as the corrective phase of a measured move down. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Reversals perform better after 
upward breakouts in bull markets, and continuations do better after downward 
breakouts. 


Table 59.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 448 1,597 633 
Reversal (R), continua- 60% R, 40% C 45% R, 55% C 45% R, 55% C 

tion (C) occurrence 
Reversal, continuation 41% R, 37% C -15% R, -16% C —22% R, -24% C 

performance 
Average rise or decline 39% -16% -23% 
Standard & Poor's 13% -2% -10% 

500 change 
Days to ultimate 261 58 36 

high or low 
How many 52% 31% 54% 


change trend? 


910 Scallops, Descending 


Average rise or decline. The average rise in bull markets is below the 
average for all chart pattern types, but the two downward breakout columns 
show better than average results. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The 13% rise in bull markets by the 
index wasn’t enough to carry the pattern’s average rise to peak performance. 
The falling market assisted downward breakouts, especially the 10% drop in 
bear markets. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Compare the 58 days it takes scallops in 
bull markets to drop 16% with the 36 days it takes scallops in bear markets to 
drop 23%. Without doing the math, you can guess that the bear market veloc- 
ity must be higher than the bull market. Indeed, it’s 2.3 times faster. If the bull 
market were a car doing 55 mph, the bear market would whiz by at 126 mph. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how many scallops see 
price move more than 20% after the breakout. For upward breakouts, values 
above 50% I consider good. However, the bear market downward breakout 
column shows the best performance of the group. 

Table 59.3 shows failure rates for descending scallops. Of course, your 
eyes will search for the lowest rate in the table, and you will find it in the right- 
most column: bear market, down breakout. Just 7% fail to see price drop more 
than 5%. This figure more than triples to 22% and posts a steep rise to 35% 
for declines measuring 10% and 15%, respectively. 

Notice that for larger moves, over 20%, scallops with upward breakouts 
have lower failure rates. 

What do the numbers mean? If you’re courageous and experienced, trade 
this pattern in bear markets by shorting a stock. The table gives you a feel for 
how often a scallop will fail to cover your expenses and profit margin. 


Table 59.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 63 or 14% 285 or 18% 45 or 7% 
10 69 or 29% 351 or 40% 94 or 22% 
15 45 or 40% 265 or 56% 82 or 35% 
20 37 or 48% 201 or 69% 68 or 46% 
25 30 or 54% 154 or 79% 86 or 59% 
30 27 or 60% 133 or 87% 71 or 70% 
35 22 or 65% 72 or 91% 53 or 79% 
50 45 or 75% 115 or 99% 100 or 95% 
75 40 or 84% 21 or 100% 33 or 100% 


Over 75 70 or 100% 0 or 100% 1 or 100% 


Statistics 911 


For example, if your trading expenses are 5% and you want to make 10% 
on each trade (15% total), then over a third (35%) of the scallops in bear 
markets will fail to decline more than 15%. Optimistically, about two of every 
three trades will work on average, but that outcome depends on your trading 
skills and luck. 

If the loss measures 10%, to offset the losing trade, your winners will 
have to make an average of 27%. As Table 59.3 shows, 70% of the scallops 
fail to drop more than 30% after a downward breakout in bear markets. That 
statistic suggests you will have a very difficult time making your profit margin 
consistently. 

Table 59.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The vast majority of the breakouts will be downward. 


Table 59.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 22% up 78% down 82% down 
Performance of breakouts L 31%, L-17%, L -23%, 

occurring near the M 39%, M -15%, M -24%, 

12-month low (L), middle H 41% H -14% H -20% 

(M), or high (H) 
Throwbacks/pullbacks 67% 65% 61% 


occurrence 


Average time to throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


6% in 6 days 


-7% in 6 days 


-11% in 7 days 


Average time to throwback/ = 12 days 13 days 13 days 
pullback ends 

Average rise/decline 38% -15% -22% 
for patterns with 
throwbacks/pullbacks 

Average rise/decline 41% -18% -26% 
for patterns without 
throwbacks/pullbacks 

Percentage price 74% 54% 51% 
resumes trend 

Performance with 49% -17% -23% 
breakout day gap 

Performance without 36% -16% -23% 
breakout day gap 

Average gap size $0.61 $1.08 $1.23 


912 Scallops, Descending 


Yearly position, performance. Score! The best statistic touches all three 
ranges. Upward breakouts show better performance if the breakout is within a 
third of the yearly high. Bear markets prefer the middle third of the range, and 
bull markets with downward breakouts like the lowest third. At least they are 
consistent in their inconsistency. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about 
two-thirds of the time, and it takes between 12 and 13 days, on average, for the 
stock to return to the breakout price. 

When a throwback or pullback occurs, performance suffers. That’s 
typical. Look for nearby support or resistance to reduce the chance of a throw- 
back or pullback. 

If a throwback or pullback occurs, price resumes the breakout direction 
most often (but downward breakouts show the direction is almost random). 

Gaps. Gaps help performance except in bear markets, and even in bull 
markets after a downward breakout, the performance difference isn’t an event 
worth standing on your desk and shouting, “Oh, Captain, my Captain!” Don’t 
get that reference? Watch the movie, Dead Poets Society. 

Table 59.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones except in bull 
markets after upward breakouts. 

‘To use this finding, measure the height of the pattern from the top to the 
bottom of the scallop and divide by the breakout price. If the result is greater 
than the median shown in the table, then you have a tall pattern. 

Width. Scallop width doesn’t give a performance edge worth trying to 
figure out how wide the pattern is. 

Height and width combinations. Tall and narrow patterns show better 
performance in two of three columns. The opposite of that, short and wide, do 
best after upward breakouts in bull markets. 

Table 59.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression to determine the volume trend 
from the start to the end of the scallop. 

Rising/Falling, heavy/light breakout day volume. Only upward break- 
outs in bull markets show much of a performance difference compared to the 
other two columns. Patterns with rising volume and heavy breakout volume do 
best under those conditions. 

Table 59.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I removed 
upward breakouts because the results are inaccurate. 

I measured the move from the breakout to the ultimate low and 
determined if price returned to the pattern during that move. If you placed 
a stop-loss order at the pattern’s top after a downward breakout, the stock 
would hit the order 1% (or less) of the time. Stick the stop in the middle or 
bottom of the pattern and it’ll be hit more often, but the potential loss will 
be smaller. 

Don’t forget to change the potential loss into a percentage of the current 
price to see if you can tolerate the hit to the trading account. 


Description 


Statistics 913 


Bear Market, 
Down Breakout 


Tall pattern performance 


Short pattern 
performance 


Median height as 
a percentage of 
breakout price 


Narrow pattern 
performance 


Wide pattern 
performance 


Median width 


Short and narrow 
performance 


Short and wide 
performance 


Tall and wide 
performance 


Tall and narrow 
performance 


Description 


-25% 
-22% 


30.0% 


-24% 
-23% 
31 days 
-22% 
-23% 
-23% 


-27% 


Bear Market, 
Down Breakout 


Volume trend 

Rising volume trend 
performance 

Falling volume trend 
performance 

Heavy breakout volume 
performance 

Light breakout volume 
performance 


Table 59.5 

Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, 
Up Breakout Down Breakout 
38% -18% 
41% -14% 
17.8% 18.4% 
39% -16% 
39% -16% 
36 days 30 days 
40% -14% 
42% -14% 
37% -18% 
38% -19% 

Table 59.6 
Volume Statistics 

Bull Market, Bull Market, 
Up Breakout Down Breakout 
57% down 63% down 
43% -16% 
36% -16% 
40% -16% 
35% -16% 


66% down 
-23% 


-24% 


-24% 


-23% 


Table 59.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 2010s showed the best performance 
after upward breakouts, and performance has been improving each decade. 
Downward breakouts did well in the 1990s, but performance is erratic over time. 


914 = Scallops, Descending 


Table 59.7 
How Often Stops Hit 


Description Bull Market, Down Breakout Bear Market, Down Breakout 
Pattern top 1% 0% 
Middle 9% 5% 
Pattern bottom 66% 64% 
Right rim 9% 4% 
Table 59.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 35% -18% 
2000s 41% -13% 
2010s 43% -16% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 14% 12% 
2000s 11% 22% 
2010s 16% 22% 
Table 59.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 


Busted patterns count 


Single bust count 
Double bust count 
Triple+ bust count 
Performance for all 
busted patterns 
Single busted 
performance 
Non-busted 
performance 


Failures over time. Failures show the reverse, with upward breakouts 
having inconsistent results over time, but downward breakouts show fewer 


107 or 24% 
61 or 57% 
37 or 35% 
9 or 8% 
-14% 


-20% 


-16% 


491 or 31% 
381 or 78% 
13 or 3% 
97 or 20% 
43% 


54% 


39% 


failures in the 1990s and steady failures since then. 
Table 59.9 shows busted pattern performance. 


Busted patterns count. The busted count is about what Id expect from a 
scallop. If you consider that a busted pattern sees price move no more than 10% 


78 or 12% 
50 or 64% 
1or1% 
27 or 35% 
23% 


33% 


23% 


Trading Tactics 915 


after the breakout, having 24% or 31% bust is alarming. Of course, price has to 
close opposite on the side of the breakout direction to bust a pattern (meaning 
a busted upward breakout sees price close below the bottom of the scallop). 

Busted occurrence. Sorting the type of bust into one of three bins sees 
single busts happening most often. A single busted pattern is also where you'll 
get the best performance in the new direction. 

Busted and non-busted performance. The table shows single busted 
patterns outperforming. Unfortunately, I haven’t found a way to predict that a 
chart pattern will single bust. If you can figure it out, then you can make some 
money trading single busted patterns. Even if you can’t figure it out, the single 
bust rate ranges from 57% to 78%, so the odds are on your side. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 59.10 shows trading tactics. 


Table 59.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the scallop height by taking the difference between the high- 
est high and lowest low in the pattern. Add the result to the right 
scallop peak for upward breakouts or subtract it from the lowest low 
for downward breakouts to get the target price. The bottom portion 
of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 


Breakout A close above the right lip high marks an upward breakout, and a close 
below the lowest low is a downward breakout. 


Stop location For upward breakouts, place the stop below the lowest low in the 
pattern. For downward breakouts, place the stop slightly above the 
right rim high. Move the stop as price advances. See Table 59.7 
for guidance. 


Trends Trade with the market trend, especially downward breakouts in 
bear markets. 


Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching 73% 63% 66% 

half height target 
Percentage reaching 52% 34% 34% 

full height target 
Percentage reaching 34% 11% 13% 

2x height 
Percentage reaching 25% 4% 7% 


3x height 


916 Scallops, Descending 


Measure rule, targets. I wish I had good news for the measure rule, but 
it seldom works. The bottom portion of the table shows the numbers, but only 
a third to a half of the scallops will hit their predicted targets based on the full 
height of the scallop. 

Let me give you an example of how to use the measure rule. Figure 59.6 
shows a descending scallop at the top of an upward price trend. It acts as a 
reversal. How far will price decline? Compute the formation height by sub- 
tracting the low near B (21.11) from the high at A (23.75), giving a height of 
2.64. Since the breakout is downward, subtract the result from the low (B) to 
get a target of 18.47. Price reaches the target in late July. 

If the breakout were upward, then you would add the height (2.64) to C, 
the right lip high (at 22.71), for a target of 25.35. 

If you want to increase the chance of success, then cut the height in half 
and apply it to the equation. For downward breakouts, that would almost dou- 
ble the success rate. 

Once you know the target, compute the distance to the target as a per- 
centage of the current price and compare the results to Table 39.3. For exam- 
ple, if the distance to the target is 10 in a stock with a current (breakout) price 
of 50, that’s a 20% move. Table 39.3 says that (in bull markets after upward 
breakouts) 48% of scallops will fail to see price rise more than 20%. That also 
means 52% will exceed a 20% rise. Should you take the trade? It’s your money, 
so you decide. 

Breakout. Upward breakouts use a close above the high on the right lip 
of the scallop (point C in Figure 59.5). Downward breakouts use a close below 
the lowest low in the pattern (B). Since the breakout direction is unknown 
ahead of time, do not trade a scallop until the breakout occurs unless you have 
a compelling reason for doing so. 

Remember that the breakout direction usually follows the price trend 
leading to the pattern. For example, if price is trending down, expect a down- 
ward breakout. In a strong bear market, an upward breakout may falter. 

Stop location. Since scallops perform so poorly, use a stop to protect any 
profits you may have and to limit losses. A good starting point for downward 
breakouts is to use point C (see Figure 59.5) as the stop point. For upward 
breakouts, use the formation low (B) as the stop-loss point. 

Table 59.7 shows how often four locations work. Be sure to convert the 
potential loss into a percentage of the current price. Many consider a loss of 
8% to be reasonable. 

Place the stop a few cents below a minor low (for long trades), preferably 
on an oddball number (20.93 instead of 21, for example). Novice traders may 
use a round number to trade, so position your stop below them. They will be 
stopped out, and you'll have a better chance of remaining in your trade. 

Sometimes, though, this strategy will cause a larger loss because of stop 
running (especially for thinly traded issues). That is when a stop causes price 
to decline, which trips additional stops, forcing price even lower. To avoid this 


Experience 917 


pitfall, place your stop above the others, as in 21.07 instead of 21. That posi- 
tion also narrows your loss (for long trades) but increases the likelihood of 
it being triggered. Since stop running seldom occurs, I place my stop below 
round numbers. 

Trends. Since descending scallops work best after downward breakouts 
in a declining price trend, short the stock only in bear markets. If you own 
the stock, ask yourself if you want to suffer through the average 23% decline. 
It may be wise to sell the stock and look for a more promising situation instead 
of riding out a decline. 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Gleason Corp. 


Gleason Corp. (GLE), appears in Figure 59.5, but the candles look weird 
because I didn’t have the opening price available back then. 

After a short uptrend in the winter of 1998, a descending scallop com- 
pleted at the start of the new year (E). Here’s what I wrote in my notebook: 
“This feels good, but price will probably drop from where I bought today. Stop 
is 17.50, target is 23. Aroon is buy. MACD is buy, RSI is midrange heading up. 
Japan’s economy is doing better, I think. Dollar is strong against yen, and that 
will help with 40% foreign sales. Machine tool orders will be weak, though, 
but expect upside earnings surprise in a few days.” 


Gleason Corp (GLE) 


98 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 59.5 This trade ended in a loss. 


918 Scallops, Descending 


I bought at B. Because I didn’t know that price would form the right rim 
of the scallop on that day, I must have thought that the right rim ended with 
the peak at A. Price closed above A the day before B, allowing me to enter the 
stock after an upward breakout from the right rim. 

What crummy timing. Why? Because the stock dropped (to D), just like 
I thought it might. 


¢ Lesson: Sometimes listening to your intuition can prevent a losing 
trade (like me predicting a downward move). 


I was stopped out at 17.50 (C), taking a 13% loss. I don’t know when 
earnings were announced. It could have been a catalyst for the drop to D. 

This trade worked as designed. I had a trading plan in place, and a 
stop-loss order (C) placed just below the bottom of the scallop got me out of a 
losing position. The stock continued down another 9% (to D) below my sale 
price over the next two days before moving sideways for a year. 


¢ Lesson: Avoid taking a position in a stock within 3 weeks of an earnings 
announcement. 


Titanium Metals 


I took a position in Titanium Metals Corp. (TIE) in early 2011 just as a 
descending scallop was forming. Here’s what I wrote: “24 March 2011. I like 
the tight base forming over the last week or two. This looks like a descending 
scallop. Boeing is selling more planes, which should help the stock, but that 
news hasn’t had an effect. S&P rates this a sell because they think it’s overval- 
ued but expect the aerospace industry to grow in 2011. CEO Simmons has 
been buying since August 2010, big shares, too. Everyone (analyst reports) says 
that this company will do poorly going forward, but I like the chart. This is 
not a value play, but with sales increasing or likely to do so, I think this cyclical 
play will prosper.” 

I took a small position in the stock near the bottom of the bowl and well 
before the right lip. 

The stock cooperated .. . for a time. It climbed, formed the right scal- 
lop rim, retraced, and climbed 14% above my buy price less than 2 months 
after I bought. 

After that, the stock went downhill. 

At the end of the year, I reevaluated the stock and decided to capture the 
loss for taxes and sold the stock, taking a 13% loss. Two dividend payments 
helped cushion the blow along the way. “Sell reason: tax loss selling. This has 
gone nowhere all year in a choppy form, so I selected it for tax loss selling.” 


Sample Trade 919 


¢ Lesson: I didn’t appear to have a stop-loss order in place or even a 
viable trading plan. Placing a stop below the scallop bowl would have 
limited losses to 5%. 

¢ Lesson: In both of these trades, I was hoping price would recover, 
but the bearish pattern (the majority of descending scallops break out 
downward, so it’s bearish) carried price lower. Perhaps these trades are 
two examples of using incorrect tools for the job. Don’t use a bearish 
pattern hoping for a bullish result. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 59.6 shows a sample trade for descending scallops. How would you 
trade the June scallop? The first thing you may notice is that it appears at the 
end of a long upward price trend. Thus, this scallop acts as a reversal. This 
fact does not become clear until price closes below point B, the lowest low in 
the pattern. When that happens, it signals a downward breakout and a trend 
change. That movement means shorting the stock (or selling shares you own) 
is a risky maneuver that should be left to serious traders and investors. 


Inco Limited (Copper, NYSE, N) 


f 
i 


Right-Angled and Ascending mt n 
Broadening Formation | 


iy! i 


Support ! 
at 19 Price 
| Target 
ih “ ty | 
l " 
jh, bulla Sauer 
Mh at 16 
| H_ Trend Line 
| Il Support a4 
| tq l at 14 
| | | | - 13 
- 
11 
01 Nov Dec Jan 02 Feb = Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 59.6 This descending scallop acts as a reversal of the upward price trend. 


920 Scallops, Descending 


Before taking a position in the stock, use the measure rule to determine 
how far price will decline. I already discussed this in Trading Tactics, so refer 
to the measure rule discussion there for more information. 

Look for support and resistance zones. Overhead resistance will probably 
occur at the old high (point A at 23.75), perhaps forming a double top. 

Support appears at 19, set up by the base of a right-angled and ascend- 
ing broadening formation. If price pierces 19, then I would consider it likely 
to stall at 16. Although not shown in the figure, 16 is the price at which the 
decline stalled during the summer and fall of 2001. Additional support appears 
as a broadening top, centered near 14, and extending as far back as 1999. 

Since the measure rule target (18.47) and support (at 19) are nearly the 
same price, that is where I would expect price to stop. If the market were also 
trending down during the trade, an additional decline to the next support zone 
(16) might be possible or even likely. A target below that might be a dream 
unless company fundamentals are in serious trouble. 

With a breakout price of 21.11 and a target of 19, is a 10% decline worth 
trading, especially a risky short sale? I don’t think so. Suppose price declines to 
16, for a 24% loss. Now we are talking! 

If fundamental analysis shows the market flooded with nickel, copper, 
cobalt, or precious metals, all of which Inco produces, then the oversupply 
should translate into a lower stock price. News such as that would give me 
confidence to short the stock. 

In the coming days, price drops. For short-term traders, consider cover- 
ing the short once price nears support at 19 or the predicted target of 18.47. 
Many times, the decline won’t reach the target, and it may be prudent to take 
your profits or tighten (lower) your stop. A lower stop allows you to capture 
more of your profit but still gives the stock room to drop farther. 

If you put an order to cover the short at 18.47, you would have missed it 
because price declined to 18.52 before rebounding for a week. Patience would 
be rewarded, though, when price dropped through support and continued 
down, triggering the order. 

The stock hit 16.05, pulled back to the price target, and then resumed the 
decline, making a lower low. Drawing a down trendline connecting the minor 
highs would give a timely cover signal. If you missed that signal, a retest of the 
low at 16 in early August was another one. Since the minor low did not make 
a lower low, that suggested a trend change. 

The price pattern takes the shape of a head-and-shoulders bottom (the 
S-H-S pattern in July and August), suggesting higher prices ahead and time to 
cover the short. If the order was covered at say, 17, that would give a return of 
nearly 17% in about a month. 


60 


Scallops, Descending 


and Inverted 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Looks like an upside-down J. 


Upward Breakouts 


Bull Market 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average rise 

Volume trend 
Throwbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


Long-term bullish reversal 
9 out of 39 

16% 

47% 

Upward 

58% 

62% 


921 


922 Scallops, Descending and Inverted 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish Short-term bearish 
continuation continuation 

Performance rank 10 out of 36 13 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 17% 10% 
Average drop 16% 22% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
Pullbacks 66% 61% 
Percentage meeting 29% 23% 


price target 


This chapter completes the four scallop variations: ascending, descending, and 
their inverted counterparts. The descending and inverted scallop looks like 
an upside-down J, and price typically reaches the ultimate low in less than 
2 months. It is a bearish pattern, meaning that price breaks out downward 
most often and continues lower. 

As if this pattern wore glasses, the pattern has trouble seeing the price 
target, with less than a third finding the bull’s-eye. The low success rate sug- 
gests price may not decline nearly as far as you hope. 

When several scallops appear in the same downward price trend in a bull 
market, the scallops tend to get narrower and shorter as they appear over time. 
Thus, if you are considering trading a narrow or short scallop that appears 
after price has been trending down, do so with caution. The scallop may signal 
an approaching trend change. 


Tour 


What does a descending and inverted scallop look like? Figure 60.1 shows a 
typical example. Price leading to the pattern trends downward and then bumps 
up (from A to B) and rounds over, forming an inverted bowl. After that, price 
drops, usually in a sharp, straight-line decline like that shown from B to C. 

At the end of the pattern (point C), price retraces upward, forming a sort 
of hook (point D; think of a soup ladle upside-down). The breakout occurs in 
this scallop when price closes below the lowest low in the pattern. After the 
breakout, price continues down. 

Scallop identification is not difficult, but what should you look for? 


Identification Guidelines 923 


Tesoro Petroleum (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, TSO) 


Mrs =: 
‘‘ if re “18 


wh, - 16 


: \ l i 
” WA : 


iy A 


98 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jun Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 60.1 A descending and inverted scallop appears as an upside-down J. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 60.1 shows identification guidelines for the scallop pattern. 

Appearance. The pattern resembles an inverted J with the pattern start 
(point A) higher in price than the end (point C). Half the patterns are about a 
month wide; I know you’ve been wondering about that. 

Price trend. Look for a downward price trend leading to the scallop. 
Occasionally, but rarely, you will find scallops dangling at the end of a rising 
price trend. 

Smooth top. The top of the pattern should be a convex rounded-looking 
turn, although sometimes you have to use your imagination. I did not include 
inverted V-shaped scallops where the turn was too pointed. 

End points. You are going to have a problem with end points. I did. Look 
at Figure 60.2. Where does the scallop start: at minor low A or B? Where does 
it end, at C or D? I chose the inner points, B and C, as the ends for my study 
of scallops. In a few cases, I used the outer points, A and D, when I wanted to 
hook a large scallop. In such a case, the BC scallop was not as well defined as 
the one shown in the figure. I used the nearest price turning point (minor lows) 
to mark the ends. 


924 Scallops, Descending and Inverted 


Table 60.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic | Discussion 


Appearance Price moves up and then rounds over at the top and tumbles, forming 
an inverted J shape. 


Price trend Most scallops appear in a downward price trend or at bearish 
turning points. 


Smooth top Look for daily high prices that, when connected, form a smooth turn. 
Larger patterns may not be as smooth because you are connecting 
minor highs. Allow variations. 


End points Look for the scallop’s end to be below the start. Both the start and end 
should form at turning points (minor lows). 


Proportion The width of the scallop should be proportional to its height. Avoid 
selecting scallops with narrow turns followed by large declines, or 
the reverse. 


Breakout Can be upward or downward but most often is downward. A breakout 
direction occurs when price closes above the top or below the bottom of 
the pattern. 


Frontier Airlines, Inc (Air Transport, NASDAQ, FRNT) 


| 
i Cc - 10 


r | : 


\N-4 


01 Nov’ DecjJanO2 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 03 


Figure 60.2. B and C mark the beginning and end of the scallop, not A or D. 


Proportion. The pattern should look proportional, meaning that the 
inverted bowl at the top should be sized to the height of the pattern. Do not 
pair a wide bowl with a meager decline. Use the figures in this chapter as 
guides. For example, the CD pattern isn’t a valid descending and inverted 


Focus on Failures 925 


scallop because the turn near C is too narrow (and too pointed) for the 
drop to D. 

Breakout direction. The breakout can be in any direction, but most 
times it will be downward. That’s because price ends the pattern near the bot- 
tom, making it easier for it to close lower. 


Focus on Failures 


Why do scallops fail to perform as expected? Most problems occur with iden- 
tification. Figure 60.3 shows an identification failure at turn ADB. The pat- 
tern’s ends (AB) should make the scallop look like an inverted J. Does the 
scallop shown in the figure portray this feature? No. Point A is too close to the 
price of B, making it look like an inverted U, nota J. 

This illustration also brings up the question of where the pattern starts. 
If you chose C as the starting point, then the pattern is clearly wrong, because 
C is below B. Choosing A as the first turning point puts the start slightly above 
B, but still not far enough. 

Suppose that A and B are fine. Look at the width compared to the height. 
The decline from D to B is not proportional to the width. In other words, a 
pattern this wide should have a longer decline. 

In the patterns I looked at, the average decline from D to B is twice the 
distance from D to A. That is a guideline to keep in mind. 


Merrill Lynch and Company (Securities Brokerage, NYSE, MER) 

i 

iu! i i} 7 
I, hi im i” 
Ld hy ‘ly Ih 


My \ AA) le A | | \ I 
| 
| | 1 yf ' 


i i} 


it 
ih \ 


v= 


yt | | | f 
tl | 


Vi 


Pert ptr rr tbr te tb ateeins 
a 
ro) 


= 37 


= 
=> 
tou 
ww 
Aan 


- 28 
01 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 02 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 60.3 A pattern failure: Price at A should be well above B. 


926 Scallops, Descending and Inverted 


Statistics 


Table 60.2 shows general statistics for scallops. 

Number found. I counted 2,150 scallops in 505 stocks with the first 
hooked in August 1991 and the most recent in December 2018. Not all stocks 
covered the entire period and some stocks no longer trade. 

Because patterns in bear markets with upward breakouts were few, I 
removed them from the tables. Most of the time, you’ll find this pattern in bull 
markets with downward breakouts. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Downward breakouts 
acted as continuation patterns most often (price continued trending lower). 
Upward breakouts were reversals of the downward price trend. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Upward breakouts show reversals 
outperforming and downward breakouts have continuations doing better. 

Average rise or decline. The average rise or decline appears in the table. 
The best performance rank is ninth (which is quite good) and that’s for upward 
breakouts in bull markets. Even though downward breakouts happen most 
often (performance rank: tenth, also good), price doesn’t drop that far after a 
breakout on average. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The general market move highlights its 
influence on individual stocks. In other words, if a rising tide lifts all boats, the 
15% move in the index contributed to the 47% rise in bull markets. 

Similarly, the 10% drop in the index helped price in bear markets take the 
stock lower. I can’t prove those statements are true, but I have seen research 
that shows the influence of the market on stock behavior and I’ve also tracked 
my own. I do best when trading with the market trend instead of against it. 


Table 60.2 
General Statistics 


Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 477 1,118 452 


Reversal (R), continua- 
tion (C) occurrence 


Reversal, continuation 


69% R, 31% C 


49% R, 44% C 


21% R, 79% C 


-15% R, -16% C 


15% R, 85% C 


-20% R, -22% C 


performance 

Average rise or decline 47% -16% -22% 

Standard & Poor's 15% -2% -10% 
500 change 

Days to ultimate 331 56 31 
high or low 

How many 58% 29% 47% 


change trend? 


Statistics 927 


Days to ultimate high or low. For downward breakouts, does price fall 
faster in bear markets than in bull ones? Yes. In fact price drops 2.5 times as 
fast in bear markets. So maybe this is proof of the market’s influence on indi- 
vidual stocks. 

How many change trend? This is a measure, a count really, of how many 
scallops see price move more than 20% after the breakout (on the way to the 
ultimate high or low). I consider values above 50% for upward breakouts to be 
yummy for your tummy. In bear markets, downward breakouts come close, at 
47%, so that’s a jolly good showing, too. 

Table 60.3 shows failure rates for descending and inverted scallops. 
The failure rate in bear markets is the lowest of the three columns, so let’s 
talk about it. 

I found that 10% of the patterns failed to see price drop more than 5% 
after the breakout. The failure rate more than doubles for drops of 10%, mean- 
ing 25% of patterns failed to see price drop more than 10%. 

You can see how the failure rate rises for small changes in the maximum 
price rise or decline. 

This table is quite useful as a tool to check expectations. If you trade a 
scallop and hope for a large decline, say 50%, less than 5% will make that 
kind of a drop after a downward breakout (95% to 99% will fail to drop more 
than 50%). 

Table 60.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. As I mentioned, most of the breakouts from scal- 
lops are downward. A breakout occurs when price closes below the bottom of 
the scallop. An upward breakout sees price close above the top of the scallop, 
and because the pattern is so tall, that’s rare. Also, price ends the pattern near 
the bottom anyway, making a downward breakout more likely. 


Table 60.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 75 or 16% 185 or 17% 43 or 10% 
10 50 or 26% 245 or 38% 68 or 25% 
15 43 or 35% 210 or 57% 63 or 38% 
20 30 or 42% 152 or 71% 66 or 53% 
25 30 or 48% 112 or 81% 48 or 64% 
30 27 or 53% 92 or 89% 43 or 73% 
35 26 or 59% 49 or 93% 30 or 80% 
50 48 or 69% 58 or 99% 68 or 95% 
75 54 or 80% 15 or 100% 20 or 99% 


Over 75 94 or 100% 0 or 100% 3 or 100% 


928 


Scallops, Descending and Inverted 


Table 60.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 30% up 70% down 81% down 
Performance of breakouts L 47%, L-16%, L-22%, 
occurring near the M 41%, M -15%, M -22%, 
12-month low (L), H 50% H -13% H -20% 
middle (M), or high (H) 
Throwbacks/pullbacks 58% 66% 61% 


occurrence 


Average time to throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


5% in 7 days 


-7% in 6 days 


-12% in 6 days 


Average time to throwback/ 12 days 12 days 11 days 
pullback ends 

Average rise/decline for 46% -16% -21% 
patterns with throw- 
backs/pullbacks 

Average rise/decline for 49% -16% -24% 
patterns without throw- 
backs/pullbacks 

Percentage price 82% 57% 45% 
resumes trend 

Performance with breakout 49% -16% -23% 
day gap 

Performance without breakout 47% -16% -22% 
day gap 

Average gap size $1.56 $0.74 $1.07 


Yearly position, performance. Mapping the performance according to 
where the breakout occurred in the yearly price range showed that the best 
performers in bull markets were within a third of the yearly high. Downward 
breakouts (bull markets) preferred the yearly low. In bear markets, stocks per- 
formed better if they were not near the yearly high. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. As ’m writing this book, I get a sense of 
the numbers for pattern behavior. I know that throwbacks and pullbacks hap- 
pen about two-thirds of the time. Scallops deviate from that somewhat as the 
table shows. 

It usually takes 11 or 12 days to make a round-trip during a throwback or 
pullback (to return to the breakout price), and half that time to reach the apex 
of its turn on average. Downward breakouts in bear markets make an aggres- 
sive push downward, falling 12% in 6 days (which is very unusual because it’s 
so large). That’s based on 274 patterns, so the sample count is high (good), too. 


Statistics 929 


If a throwback or pullback appears, performance usually suffers. However, 
downward breakouts in bull markets don’t see any performance difference. 

After a throwback or pullback completes, price resumes moving in the 
breakout direction most of the time, with the exception being downward 
breakouts in bear markets. Those see price rise 55% of the time (only 45% 
continue lower). 

Gaps. Scallops show mixed results as far as breakout day gaps are con- 
cerned. They lean toward gaps helping performance (two out of three columns 
support this). 

If you want to participate in better gap performance, then you’re in luck. 
I measured performance using the opening price the day after the gap (to the 
ultimate high or low), so you can buy in and enjoy the ride, hopefully, to larger 
profit, even though you missed owning the stock during the gap. 

Table 60.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall scallops perform better than short ones across all three col- 
umns. Height is one of the most reliable predictors of future performance. 
‘To use this finding, measure the scallop’s height and divide it by the breakout 
price. Then compare the result against the median listed in the table. Values 
above the median are tall patterns. 


Table 60.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 52% -16% -23% 
Short pattern 43% -15% -21% 
performance 
Median height as 15.5% 21.1% 37.7% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 43% -16% -22% 
performance 
Wide pattern 52% -15% -23% 
performance 
Median width 36 days 29 days 35 days 
Short and narrow 41% -16% -20% 
performance 
Short and wide 46% -13% -21% 
performance 
Tall and wide 55% -16% -23% 
performance 
Tall and narrow 46% -17% -24% 


performance 


930 — Scallops, Descending and Inverted 


Width. Performance improves for wide scallops, but it varies with break- 
out directions and market conditions. Width is not as good a performance 
indicator as height. 

Height and width combinations. The best (and worst) performance 
varies depending on the height and width of the pattern, so consult the table. 
The combinations of height and width usually track the individual traits but 
not always. By that, I mean we see that tall patterns work best in bull markets 
after upward breakouts, and wide patterns also work best. 

The combination of a tall and wide pattern does, indeed, give us the best 
performance. But you can’t say that for downward breakouts in bear markets. 
‘Tall and wide patterns should perform best, but they come in second to tall and 
narrow patterns. 

What can we learn about scallops by observing volume? Table 60.6 
shows some answers. 

Volume trend. Most chart pattern types will see receding volume across 
the pattern but there are exceptions, like scallops. They see volume trend- 
ing upward most often. Does it matter? Only in bull markets after upward 
breakouts. 

Rising/Falling volume, breakout day volume. Patterns with a rising 
volume trend in bull markets after upward breakouts see price rise an average 
of 50%. If breakout volume is heavy (above average), you'll see better perfor- 
mance, too. The other two columns don’t seem to care much about volume. 

Table 60.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. Let’s use the 
bull market, up breakout column as an example. If you place a stop at the top 
of the scallop, price on the way to the ultimate high will trigger the stop 80% 
of the time on average. 

Tuck at the stop at the bottom of the pattern and price will trip it just 3% 
of the time. You read the other two columns the same way. 


Table 60.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 73% up 69% up 75% up 
Rising volume trend 50% -16% -22% 

performance 
Falling volume trend 41% -16% -22% 

performance 
Heavy breakout vol- 48% -16% -22% 

ume performance 
Light breakout volume 45% -15% -21% 


performance 


Statistics 931 


Table 60.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 80% 1% 0% 
Middle 18% 11% 6% 
Pattern 3% 74% 65% 
bottom 

Left rim 17% 16% 8% 

Table 60.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 38% -18% 
2000s 53% -12% 
2010s 46% -14% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 11% 11% 
2000s 14% 28% 
2010s 18% 20% 


With these results, hopefully, you’ll gain a better understanding of where 
to place a stop to keep losses manageable. However, after price reaches the 
ultimate high or low, it can return to the pattern and I didn’t measure that. 

Table 60.8 shows the performance over three decades. I excluded bear 
markets from this table because they only happened in the 2000s. 

Performance over time. Performance bounces around for both breakout 
directions. The 2000s did well for upward breakouts but penalized downward 
ones. 

Failures over time. Upward breakouts see failures increase over the dec- 
ades, but downward breakouts are more random. 

Table 60.9 shows busted pattern performance. Let’s talk about the bull 
market, downward breakout column because it has the most samples. 

Busted patterns count. With 28% of scallops busting, that’s about the 
bust rate we see in other chart pattern types. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the busts into one of three bins: single, 
double, and more than two busts (triple+). Most of the patterns will single bust, 
and that’s good news. Why? Because single busted patterns outperform. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I compared the performance of 
busted patterns against their non-busted piers. Single busted patterns show 
the best performance, beating the other two rows. With 85% of scallops single 


932 Scallops, Descending and Inverted 


Table 60.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 94 or 20% 313 or 28% 41 or 9% 
Single bust count 55 or 59% 267 or 85% 27 or 66% 
Double bust count 29 or 31% 7 or 2% 1 or 2% 
Triple+ bust count 10 or 11% 39 or 12% 13 or 32% 
Performance for all -12% 45% 29% 

busted patterns 
Single busted -18% 52% 66% 

performance 
Non-busted -16% 47% 21% 

performance 


busting, you don’t have to worry (well, maybe a little) about catching a double 
or triple bust, so you can stay in the trade for a longer ride to capture as much 
of the average 52% gain as you can. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 60.10 shows trading tactics for descending and inverted scallops. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule as a guide to finding a price 
target. To use it, compute the scallop height and project it in the direction of 
the breakout. 

For example, the height of the scallop shown in Figure 60.4 is the price 
difference between B and C. The high is at 11.55 and the low is at 8.21, giving 
a difference of 3.34. Subtract this difference from the low, 8.21 (for a down- 
ward breakout, or add it to C for upward breakouts), giving a target of 4.87. 
Price reaches the target less than a month after the breakout. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often the measure rule works. 
The example cited above uses the full height in a bear market. The table shows 
the measure rule works just 23% of the time. For a closer target cut the height 
in half or a quarter and apply it to the breakout price. 

Another check of the target is to turn it into a percentage decline. In this 
example, the predicted decline measures 41% (or 3.34/8.21). Because the scal- 
lop is in a bear market, Table 60.3 shows that 80% will fail to see price drop 
more than 35% (the closest decline to 41%). The results suggest the target is 
too far away and fewer than 20% will decline that far. 

Entry signal. Sell short when price closes below the scallop’s low. That 
means a close below point B. If you own a stock, consider selling, because price 
is likely to continue down (it’s a bear market, after all). 


Trading Tactic 


Trading Tactics 933 


Table 60.10 
Trading Tactics 


Explanation 


Measure rule 


Entry signal 


Exit signal 


Search for nearby 
support and 
resistance 


Wait for breakout 


Stop location 
Busted trade 


Used to set a target price. Compute the difference between the 
scallop’s high and low. Subtract the difference from the breakout 
price for downward breakouts or add it to the pattern’s top for 
upward breakouts. The result is the target price. The bottom por- 
tion of the table shows how often price reaches the target. 


For downward breakouts, enter a trade when price closes below the 
bottom of the scallop. 


If price rises to the price level of the start of the pattern, consider 
closing out your short position. If it rises above the pattern’s high, 
get out of the trade. Now! 

Avoid nearby underlying support. Look for minor highs and lows, 
solid blocks of horizontal price movement, round numbers, 
trendlines, and chart pattern support and resistance. 

Wait for price to close below the formation low or above the scal- 
lop’s top before entering a trade. 


See Table 60.7 
Downward breakouts in bull markets that single bust can lead to 


profitable trades. 


Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching 86% 79% 69% 

quarter height target 
Percentage reaching 77% 58% 47% 

half height target 
Percentage reaching 62% 29% 23% 

full height target 
Percentage reaching 42% 8% 6% 


2x height 


Exit signal. Consider covering your short if price retraces to the price 
level of point A in the figure, the start of the pattern. Always close out your 
short position if price rises to C, the highest high in the pattern. If that hap- 
pens, the stock is saying you have made a mistake. Get out. 

Search for nearby support and resistance. This step is important. If you 
know where support and resistance are, you can determine how far price will 
fall or rise, respectively. Trade or do not trade accordingly. Also remember that 
price wil] push through support and resistance eventually, if given the chance. 

Wait for breakout. Before you short a stock, do your homework and 
make sure it is worth shorting. Do not short a descending and inverted scallop 
until it confirms, meaning that price must close below the pattern’s low. 


934 = Scallops, Descending and Inverted 


Stop location. Consult Table 60.7 for guidance on where to place a stop- 
loss order. 

Busted trade. Perhaps the best way to trade a scallop is to wait for a 
downward breakout to bust in a bull market. Single busts happen 85% of the 
time according to Table 60.9 and lead to average gains of 52%. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 60.4 shows this chapter’s sample trade. Here is how Rich used 
the pattern. 

Rich is an experienced trader who dares to short a stock when the fun- 
damentals warrant. In the bear market of 2001, when tech stocks were being 
slaughtered wholesale, he started fishing for stocks to short and found a can- 
didate in Gateway. 

He did his fundamental research by checking out the company and others 
in the same industry. When he was comfortable with his choice, he waited for 
the right opportunity and found it when the descending and inverted scallop 
appeared in May. 

“T reviewed the identification guidelines, and some of what I found wor- 
ried me.” The overall price trend from January was downward except for the 
recent retrace in April (D). The May scallop looked good, like an inverted J 


Gateway Inc (Computers & Peripherals, NYSE, GTW) 
Ki 
I 
| ll Ui f 
il hy Hy th 
It ah * 


| hi 


is) 
ie} 
= 
= oC 
= o 
4 
[e} 
me} 
| mer (aa a a A Mae a GG 
= 
N 


14 
Sold Short Cc 13 
Measured 12 
Move Down ihn 11 
Ma tay [ 10 
A | - 9 
I’ i hy _ 8 
og 

le I 
| \ Stop P 

"yf 

| h 5 
- 4 
3 

01 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 60.4 As described in the Sample Trade, Rich shorted this stock and a stop 
closed out his position. 


Sample Trade 935 


with a smooth top. The bowl height as a percentage of the scallop’s height 
turned out to be 65%, close to the 61.8% Fibonacci number, but was it close 
enough? The ends of the scallop were clean (meaning a sharp, visible turn), 
and the pattern looked proportional. 

Most knowledgeable traders would have no trouble spotting this scallop. 
Combined with the April peak (D), the scallop looked like a double top. 

“T shorted it the day after price closed below the lowest low in the pattern 
at 16. Then I placed a stop just above the pattern’s high at 20.05,” figuring that 
it was just above a round number (a common resistance area) and just above 
two minor highs (the scallop top and the earlier peak in April). “Now that I 
think about it, the stop was too far away: 25%. That was a mistake.” 

Price slid in a straight-line run, following the slope of the earlier down- 
turn (January to March), a measured move down pattern that predicted a low 
of about 10. “That decline gave me confidence and room to ride out the small 
double top in June.” 

Then earnings came out, and the stock gapped downward in mid-July, 
forming another scallop in August. “I remember rubbing my hands together 
with glee.” He calculated the price target for this lower scallop and saw that 
it was 4.87. He did not think price would drop that far, but he monitored it 
closely, trailing his stop along the way to capture more profit, just in case. 

Price reached a low of 4.24 in early October and then started rebounding. 
His stop was at 6.35, a few pennies above the minor high in September (E) and 
just above the early October peak. When price touched his stop, his broker 
closed out the position. 

From the buy price of 16 to the stop price of 6.35, he made 60% in about 
5 months. 

“I’m shaking my head about the stop placement in this trade,” he said. 
“Price hit 4.24, and my stop was at 6.35. That’s 50% away. What was I thinking? 
Pll have to work on that.” 


61 


Three Falling Peaks 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Three peaks, each with a price lower than the previous and proportional 
to one another. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bear- Short-term 
ish reversal bearish reversal 
Performance rank 21 out of 36 8 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 22% 7% 
Average decline 15% 23% 
Volume trend Downward Random 
Pullbacks 66% 63% 
Percentage meeting 23% 24% 
price target 
See also ‘Triple tops 


I first learned about this chart pattern when Robert Fischer asked me to endorse 
his book, coauthored with Jens Fischer, Candlesticks, Fibonacci, and Chart Pattern 
Trading Tools (Wiley, 2003). 

The chart pattern is especially effective in bear markets where the perfor- 
mance rank is 8. The failure rate is low, too, with a rank of 7 (not shown, but a 
rank of 1 means the fewest failures). 


936 


Tour 937 


One disappointment with this chart pattern is how infrequently the 
measure rule works. Less than a quarter of the time, price reaches the target 
(which is the pattern height subtracted from the lowest low price). That can be 
explained because the pattern is often tall, so expecting a tall decline is often 
unrealistic. 

Let’s look under the hood to see what drives this pattern. 


Tour 


What does a three falling peaks chart pattern look like? I am sure you can 
conjure up an image of one, but Figure 61.1 shows two examples. The pat- 
tern consists of three peaks of equal size and shape, with each succeeding peak 
lower than the prior one. 

Many times, you will find this pattern at the end of an uptrend (peak 
Al marks the end), so it acts as a reversal. At other times, it will continue the 
downtrend like the B1 to B3 peaks show. 

Is that all there is to know about identifying three falling peaks? Actually, 
it is a bit more complicated, so let’s discuss finding these patterns. 


Air Products and Chemicals, Inc (Chemical (Diversified), NYSE, APD) 


{ - 54 


i i NW ‘ MN Ky ; 
N rm . iF, | fh - 


" we cet) ity 
yn ‘A i ,/ NM 
| WE 


| Line 
| re 


02 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 61.1 The three falling peaks chart pattern begins with the highest peak in 
the trend and continues with two successively lower peaks. 


938 Three Falling Peaks 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 61.1 shows the identification guidelines for the three falling peaks chart 
pattern. 

Appearance. The highest high in each peak must be lower than the prior 
peak. Allow no ties because we are not searching for double or triple tops. 
The three peaks need not follow a straight down-sloping trendline. 

The three peaks should look similar. Don’t mix wide peaks with narrow 
ones. However, I don’t have a good reason for requiring the peaks to look 
similar. I didn’t test the behavior of odd-looking patterns, so if you want to mix 
narrow and wide peaks, then that’s fine. 

Price trend. Since we are looking for three peaks, you are going to have 
to do some counting. (Have a set of fingers available, but toes work, too. I tested 
this.) Begin counting with the highest high on the chart where an upward price 
trend ends and a stair-step decline begins. Make sure that each peak is below 
the price of the prior one. 

Proportion. The patterns I chose appeared similar in size and shape, 
meaning I did not mix wide and tall peaks with short ones. Consider 
Figure 61.2. Peaks Al, A2, and A3 appear similar in magnitude. They are all 
significant peaks, and each peak is below the one before. 

Notice that the B peaks (B1, B2, B3) are much smaller in size and shape 
but distinguishable as three independent peaks, not three peaks born from the 
same congestion region. Both Al to A3 and B1 to B3 are valid three falling 
peaks patterns. 

The reason for the rule about proportion is to avoid confusion about 
peak selection. Consider peaks C and D. To me, these look like something I 
missed with my lawnmower. They are minor highs, as are the other A peaks, 
but they are not of the same magnitude. They are 1- or 2-day price spikes that 
appear out of place with the rounded-appearing A1 peak. 


Table 61.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Look for three peaks, each priced below the prior one and each 


appearing similar. 

Price trend Start at the end of an upward price trend and look for three 
descending peaks. 

Proportion Each peak should look similar to its preceding peak. If you begin 
with wide peaks, select only wide ones, but be flexible. 

Breakout direction, | The breakout is always downward when price closes below the 

confirmation bottom of the lowest price in the pattern. The pattern confirms 

as valid only after a downward breakout. 


Identification Guidelines 939 


Airgas, Inc (Chemical (Specialty), NYSE, ARG) 


A2 = 25 


A3 = 22 
, 


th B2 
E \! In, Pullback 


went | Piya g thy 2 
| 


| I yl - 8 
We 18 


! Pn : 
Me “Wy My 22 


i i 


Confirmation 
Line 


hud Breakout ~ 16 


an 
| \, I 


96 Dec Jan 97 Feb Mar Apr Mar Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 61.2 Peaks Al, A2, and A3 form three falling peaks, as do B1, B2, and B3. 
Peaks C and D are too small and narrow to be part of the A1-A3 pattern. Peak E is 
fine, but the higher A3 peak suggests that A3 is a better selection as the last peak 
in the series. 


When selecting the three peaks, I ignored C and D and went with Al, A2, 
and A3. 

Why not select peak E? This peak is robust enough to join the party, so 
you could call it the third peak. When A3 comes along, you might question the 
validity of the Al, A2, E pattern because A3 forms a higher high. 

The way I looked at the pattern, I liked the idea that you could draw a 
trendline along the Al, A2, and A3 peaks (which isn’t mandatory). Having E as 
the last peak seems out of place. Also, a higher peak (such as A3 when E was the 
third peak) before confirmation might invalidate the pattern. 

However, I disallowed patterns when price closed above the highest high 
(Al), not a close above the lowest high (E). You might consider a close above 
the lowest high as invalidating the pattern. I have not tested this variation, but 
it might lead to better (or worse) performance. 

Breakout direction. The breakout from this pattern is always downward 
when price closes below the lowest valley in the pattern. An upward break- 
out (a close above the top of the highest peak) invalidates the three falling 
peaks pattern. 

The figure shows the confirmation price as a horizontal line, drawn 
from the lowest low. The pattern confirms as a valid pattern when price closes 
below the line, usually the valley between the second and last peak. If the valley 


940 Three Falling Peaks 


between peaks 1 and 2 marks the lowest low, I would ignore it and use the most 
recent valley (the one between the second and last peaks) as the confirmation 
price. That will get you in (to short) or out (of a long holding) sooner than if 
you wait for price to close below the lowest low set by the first two peaks. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 61.3 is the basis of a quiz. Which of the three patterns (A, B, or C) are 
valid three falling peaks patterns? Let me work right to left, beginning with 
the C series. Is C1 to C3 a valid three falling peaks pattern? We are looking for 
three falling peaks, and these three are rising. Thus, the C series is not a three 
falling peaks pattern. 

What about B1, B2, and B3? Here we have three peaks, each one below 
the prior one. B2 and B3 are narrow and B1 seems wide. You might exclude 
it on that basis alone (I would not because they look fine to me. My reading 
glasses are around here, somewhere), but there is a much bigger problem. 
What is it? 

Confirmation. The pattern does not confirm because price never closes 
below the lowest low before climbing above the highest high. The B series of 
peaks is not a valid three falling peaks pattern. 


Liz Claiborne (Apparel, NYSE, LIZ) Manpower, Inc (Human Resources, NYSE, MAN) 

S - 36 
~ 22 - 35 
ls oll . 

AI A2 i | i fl 
| hl AB - 20 | A Me lH oe 

i | A Hh 
Hl | 
| | - -19 | th ih Mt 30 
ih | | || | - - 29 
, | B2 - - 18 | Mi Confirmation Line | age 
I - 26 
' | | 
M, - 16 ane 
- 
-~ 15 - 23 
99 Oct Nov Dec Jan00O Feb 01 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 61.3. Which of these patterns is a valid three falling peaks chart pattern? 


Focus on Failures 941 


What about Al, A2, and A3? The three peaks appear similar, and the pat- 
tern confirms when price closes below the valley between A2 and A3. Guess 
what? It is also an invalid pattern. Why? 

Look at peak A2. See that spike to the left of A2? It is part of A2, and it is 
taller than Al by 2 cents. Thus, the second peak is higher than the first, so it is 
not a valid three falling peaks pattern. 

In my statistics, I did not include it as a valid pattern, but since it worked 
out well, you might research similar patterns (with a peak slightly above the 
prior peak) and see how they perform. Yes, I’m being picky on this one. If you 
want to include a wider peak A2 as valid, then that’s fine. The overall pattern 
shows three significant highs trending downward. 

Figure 61.4 shows a common failure of the three falling peaks chart pat- 
tern. The stock drops after the breakout but only by a small amount before 
encountering support. 

In the figure, the A pattern forms at the top of a long uptrend that began 
in November 1999 (not shown). The pattern works just fine. It’s a valid three 
falling peaks pattern and price declines like it’s supposed to. 

The B pattern is farther down the price chain, so it must be closer to the 
ultimate low. It is, and price breaks out downward at E, falling just 2% below 
D, and then begins climbing. The climb to F measures a whopping 58%. 

If you were to look back in time, you would see a large zone of support 
extending back as far as 1995. That support is not as clear as it could be, but 


Andrew Corporation (Telecom, Equipment, NASDAQ, ANDW) 


1 
aS 
aS 


Al 


Ih 
le, | 


if 
a 
N 


‘y 


WA 


WWwWwwwest 
ONANHWO 


\e wt yy i r 
Wi h ah i af 
hf af \ 


N 
oo 


NON 
ha 


\ 


WT] 


ot 
Ukimate \ iy Mi : 15 


00 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 01 Fbe Mar Apr May 


Figure 61.4 After declining just 2% below point D, the stock rallies 58% from E 
to F, signaling a trend change. 


942 Three Falling Peaks 


the nearness in price of the October bottom and point D suggests an effective 
support zone. The stock tried to pierce the zone for the third time (at E) and 
failed. Pattern B failed as a three falling peaks pattern (it’s a valid chart pattern, 
but it didn’t perform up to expectations). 

The lesson from this figure is twofold. First, the best trades often come 
after trend changes. The lower down the trend the three falling peaks pattern 
appears, the less potential profit remains. 

That is not always the case because of how I determine a trend change 
(a 20% rise off the ultimate low). The ultimate low, as in this case, can appear 
in the middle of a downtrend, not at the very end. Still the guideline is a good 
one. The rise to F signaled a trend change, making E the ultimate low. 

Second, always search for underlying support before trading, especially 
if you intend to short a stock. Once you place a trade, use a stop-loss order to 
protect your money. 

Pattern C is a valid three falling peaks, and the ultimate low just squeaks 
by, with a decline of 9%. It’s not a failure, but I wouldn’t bring it home and tell 
Mom I’m going to marty it. 


Statistics 


Table 61.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 3,184 patterns (yes, I ran out of finger and toes 
counting that many) in 322 stocks and found the first one in June 1995 and the 
most recent in March 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, some no 
longer trade, and I’m sure I gave up searching for these patterns because they 
are so prolific. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Most of the patterns 
appear at the end of an uptrend. They act as reversals. The others are part 
of a downtrend in progress, sometimes as the second or third chart pattern 
in a row. 


Table 61.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 2,300 884 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 71%R, 29% C 63% R, 37% C 
Reversal, continuation performance -14% R, -16% C -23% R, -22% C 
Average decline -15% -23% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -3% -11% 
Days to ultimate low 55 37 


How many change trend? 27% 50% 


Statistics 943 


Reversal/continuation performance. In bull markets, continuations 
perform marginally better than reversals, but in bear markets, the results flip 
with reversals outperforming slightly. 

Average decline. As one might expect, the 23% decline in bear markets 
handily beats the 15% drop in bull markets. This finding suggests the pat- 
tern is more at home in bear markets than in bull ones. It is a bearish pattern, 
after all. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In both bull and bear markets, the S&P 
500 index declined. I measured the move in the index by using the dates of the 
breakout from the three falling peaks chart pattern to the ultimate low. 

Notice how the large S&P decline—11%—helped the bear market per- 
formance. The lesson here is to always trade with the market trend. Before 
placing a trade, ask yourself if the market is going to rise or fall. Go long or 
short accordingly. Don’t trade against the market or industry trend. 

Days to ultimate low. It takes between 1 and 2 months for price to reach 
the ultimate low on average. Since price declined 23% in 37 days in bear mar- 
kets but only 15% in 55 days in bull markets, the bear market decline must 
have been steeper. The math says the bear market drop is 2.3 times as fast as 
the bull market one. Now that’s something you can tell Mom. 

How many change trend? This row is a count of how many chart pat- 
terns see price drop more than 20%. If we use the average for all chart patterns 
as the benchmark, the numbers shown are just one percentage point from their 
respective averages. Notice, however, that almost twice as many patterns drop 
more than 20% in bear markets. 

Table 61.3 shows failure rates for this chart pattern. The bear market 
rates are lower than the bull market ones. For best performance, trade this 
pattern in bear markets. 


Table 61.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 517 or 22% 65 or 7% 
10 544 or 46% 132 or 22% 
15 340 or 61% 115 or 35% 
20 272 or 73% 128 or 50% 
25 186 or 81% 103 or 61% 
30 155 or 88% 92 or 72% 
35 99 or 92% 71 or 80% 
50 147 or 98% 133 or 95% 
75 40 or 100% 43 or 100% 


Over 75 0 or 100% 2 or 100% 


944 _ Three Falling Peaks 


Also, notice how the failure rate climbs for small changes in the maxi- 
mum price decline. For example, in bear markets, 7% of three falling peaks 
patterns fail to drop more than 5% after the breakout. The breakeven rate tri- 
ples to 22% failing to drop more than 10% and rises to 35% failing to decline 
more than 15%. This type of increase is typical for many chart pattern types. 

What the numbers show is that the decline may not be substantial before 
a rebound occurs, because much of the decline has already taken place (with 
each peak). By that, I mean the decline from the first to the third peak is not 
included in the table, only the drop from the breakout to the ultimate low. 

Table 61.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. This chart pattern breaks out downward all of the 
time. An upward breakout invalidates the pattern. 

Yearly position, performance. In bull markets, the best performance 
comes from patterns with breakouts within a third of the yearly low. Bear mar- 
ket patterns do best near the yearly high. However, the 29% decline is based 
on just 33 patterns, so it’s likely to change with additional samples. 

Pullbacks. A pullback occurs about two-thirds of the time and takes 11 
or 12 days, on average, to complete the journey back to the breakout price. 
When a pullback occurs, performance suffers. For example, in bull markets, 
patterns with pullbacks see price drop 14% after the breakout. Without pull- 
backs, the decline averages 16%. The bear market shows an even wider spread. 

After a pullback completes, price resumes declining about half the time. 


Table 61.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-16%, M-14%, L -23%, M -23%, 

12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H-13% H -29% 
Pullback occurrence 66% 63% 
Average time to pullback bottoms -7% in 6 days -11% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 11 days 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -14% -21% 
Average decline for patterns without -16% -26% 

pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 54% 51% 
Performance with breakout day gap -16% -25% 
Performance without breakout day gap -15% -22% 


Average gap size $1.32 $1.23 


Statistics 945 


Gaps. Breakout day gaps help performance. I measured this by calculat- 
ing performance using the breakout price, which is the opening price the day 
after the gap. Thus, you can open a trade after a gap appears and capture the 
better performance. 

Table 61.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Height is usually the best predictor of performance, and you can 
see that tall patterns in bull markets outperform short ones. 

To use this, measure the height of the three falling peaks chart pattern 
(highest high to lowest low) and divide by the breakout price (the lowest low). 
If the result is larger than the median shown in the table, then you have a 
tall pattern. 

Width. With this pattern, width doesn’t give you much of a perfor- 
mance edge. 

Height and width combinations. The bear market numbers don’t show 
a compelling advantage to a height and width combination. Bull market pat- 
terns suggest sticking with a tall pattern, either narrow or wide (narrow per- 
forms better). 

Table 61.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. The bear market statistics show 50.1% have volume 
trending upward. That’s random. Even the bull market value is near random. 

Rising/Falling volume, breakout day volume. Neither column of num- 
bers shows volume having much influence on performance. 

Table 61.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. Because the 
pattern is tall, a stop at the pattern’s top may never be hit as price searches for 
the ultimate low. After it finds the ultimate low, then yes, price can rebound to 
trigger the stop. I only looked as price searched for the ultimate low, not after. 


Table 61.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -16% -23% 
Short pattern performance -14% -23% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 22.4% 37.1% 
Narrow pattern performance -15% -22% 
Wide pattern performance -15% -23% 
Median width 57 days 62 days 
Short and narrow performance -14% -22% 
Short and wide performance -14% -23% 
Tall and wide performance -16% -23% 


Tall and narrow performance -17% -22% 


946 Three Falling Peaks 


Table 61.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 57% down 50% up 
Rising volume trend performance -15% -22% 
Falling volume trend performance -15% -24% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -15% -23% 
Light breakout volume performance -15% -23% 

Table 61.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 0% 0% 
Middle 8% 3% 
Pattern bottom 72% 71% 

Table 61.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -17% 
2000s -13% 
2010s -15% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 15% 
2000s 27% 
2010s 24% 


Once you decide on a location for your stop-loss order, change the 
potential loss into a percentage of the current price to see if it’s a value you 
can tolerate. 

Table 61.8 shows the performance over three decades. Bear markets are 
not included in the table because they all occurred in the 2000s. 

Performance over time. The performance over three decades is stable, 
with the 2000s showing the worst performance (price declines least) and the 
1990s showing the best. 

Failures over time. The failure rate bounces around quite a bit as the 
table shows. Failures were much lower in the 1990s than they have been in the 
two more recent decades. 

Table 61.9 shows busted pattern performance. 


Trading Tactics 947 


Table 61.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 796 or 35% 85 or 10% 
Single bust count 619 or 78% 60 or 71% 
Double bust count 30 or 4% 5 or 6% 
Triple+ bust count 147 or 18% 20 or 24% 
Performance for all busted patterns 40% 34% 
Single busted performance 49% 46% 


Busted patterns count. Over a third of the patterns will bust. A bust 
happens after price breaks out downward, drops no more than 10%, and recov- 
ers to close all the way above the top of the pattern. With this pattern being so 
tall, if it busts a downward breakout, there must be a good reason, so do your 
research and check the fundamentals. 

Busted occurrence. For those patterns that busted, I put them into one 
of three bins (single, double, and more than two busts, which I call triple+) 
based on how many times they bust. Single busts happen most often, and my 
guess is that’s because the three falling peaks pattern is so tall. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I don’t show the performance of 
a non-busted three falling peaks pattern because there is no such thing. How- 
ever, I show the performance of busted patterns as a group (single, double, and 
triple+ busts) and single busted patterns. 

If you want to trade a busted pattern, hope it single busts and ride price 
upward. The percentage measures from the top of the chart pattern to the 
ultimate high. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 61.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Use the formation height subtracted from the 
lowest low in the three falling peaks chart pattern to get a target. As an exam- 
ple, consider Figure 61.6. The highest high is at point 1 (49) and the lowest 
low, point A (33), giving a height of 16. Subtracting the height from the lowest 
low gives a target of 17. The figure does not show it, but price met the target 
and continued much lower. 

The bottom portion of the table shows that using the full height (as we 
did in this example) rarely works. Consider cutting the height in half or more 
and subtracting it from the breakout price to get a closer target. Ignore any 
target below zero. 


948 Three Falling Peaks 


Table 61.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height from the highest high to lowest low 
in the pattern and then subtract the result from the lowest low. The 
result gives a target price. Use the lower portion of this table to see 
how often this method works. 


Underly- Before trading, check for support zones and avoid trading a stock with 
ing support nearby support. 
Early entry If the valley between the first two peaks is below the valley between the 


last two peaks, use the more recent valley as the confirmation price 
instead of the lowest low in the pattern. 


Wait for Wait for price to close below the breakout (the lowest low or trendline 
confirmation break) before shorting the stock. 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 

Percentage reaching quarter height target 69% 71% 

Percentage reaching half height target 47% 49% 

Percentage reaching full height target 23% 24% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 7% 8% 


Once you have a target located, change the potential drop into a percent- 
age to see if it is realistic. If you’re unsure, then use Table 61.3 to help gauge 
the drop. In our example the breakout price is about 35, so the decline would 
be 16/35 or 46%. Table 61.3 shows that in bear markets 80% of patterns will 
fail to see price drop more than 35% and 95% will fail to see price drop more 
than 50%. So expecting a 46% decline is unrealistic. 

Underlying support. Before trading the chart pattern, check for under- 
lying support. Underlying support will tell you how far price is likely to decline. 
If underlying support is too close to the breakout or too robust, then search for 
another trade. 

Overhead resistance will tell you how much you stand to lose when things 
go wrong. Look for a nearby minor high at which to place a stop; just above the 
lowest of the three peaks is a good location. If the stop is too far away from 
the breakout price, then look elsewhere for a more promising trade or move the 
stop closer to the breakout price. 

Early entry. In this example, compare the price of the lowest low between 
the first two peaks (1 and 2) and the last two peaks (2 and 3). If the right valley 
(B) is higher than the left (A), use the right valley (B) as the breakout price. 
A close below the higher of the two valleys will get you in earlier than waiting 
for a close below the lowest low. 


Experience 949 


Wait for confirmation. Wait for a close below the lowest low in the 
pattern (or use Early entry) before trading the chart pattern. Only when price 
closes below the lowest low does the pattern become valid. In too many cases 
that I have seen, the pattern does not confirm and price shoots upward. A short 
sale on such a pattern quickly turns into a loss. Always wait for confirmation 
unless you have a good reason for trading early. 


Experience 


I have one trade worth discussing, and I show it in Figure 61.5. I should have 
warned you that it looks complicated with all the scribbling, so don’t freak 
out. Let’s dissect the notebook entry a section at a time. I wrote this entry the 
day before B: 

“10 January 2004. I intend to sell half my holdings on Monday’s opening 
(it’s Saturday). Three falling peaks suggests further downward spin.” 

The three falling peaks pattern appears at 1, 2, 3. The peaks look simi- 
lar in shape, all are prominent minor highs and narrow-looking. The pat- 
tern breaks out downward when price closes below the lowest low in the 
pattern. I show that with horizontal line A. The breakout happens the day 
before candle B. 

“It busted below support and resistance congestion in Dec. 2003 (a small 
diamond bottom).” 

The diamond bottom is the diamond shape drawn between E and 3. Price 
breaks out upward and rises to 3, throws back, and closes below the bottom 
of the pattern on the day before B. The downward move busted the upward 


Michaels Stores (MIK) 


03 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan04 Feb = Mar Apr 


Figure 61.5 This busted three falling peaks pattern resulted in a sale just before 
the stock doubled. 


950 Three Falling Peaks 


breakout from the diamond, suggesting a strong move downward (but no 
guarantee, of course). As the chart shows, the strong drop didn’t happen. 

“November head-and-shoulders top is sending prices lower. [The] meas- 
ure rule says a decline to 19.66 from the 22.50 neckline breakout.” 

The head-and-shoulders top is at C, 1, 2, with the left shoulder (C), head 
(1), and right shoulder (2). The left shoulder looks like it should go to the hos- 
pital for surgery. It’s almost the same height as 2 but a bit closer to the head 
than 2. It’s not as prominent as 2, so I guess that’s my main complaint. Even so, 
it’s a valid head-and-shoulders top. 

It confirms as a valid chart pattern when price closes below neckline E. 
Notice that the neckline at E is horizontal instead of drawn connecting the two 
armpits (the valley between C and 1, and 1 and 2). That’s because the neckline 
would slope downward and waiting for a close below the line as a sell signal 
would never occur (in this case). So for down-sloping necklines, I use a hori- 
zontal line connecting the right armpit like that shown at E. 

The stock dropped from E to below line A before finding support. The 
stock didn’t drop to the 19.66 target suggested by the measure rule. 

“This should find support at 18.50 to 20 from the horizontal consolida- 
tion region in June-July 2003.” 

I show the support region at D, a horizontal move loosely defined by the 
two horizontal lines. The top of this region matches the drop near A exactly. 
I show that with horizontal line F. It marks the start of support. 

“Since price has closed at the daily low, that suggests a lower low Monday 
but perhaps, a higher close. It could continue spinning down. It’s broken below 
trendline support, the line starting in May 2003 and connecting the August 
and December lows.” 

I show the trend with line G. It connects the three lows mentioned in 
my notebook. Price closed below the line the day before B. Notice the high 
volume as price bottomed near B. 

I sold half my position at the opening price at B and received a fill at 
20.77. I made 17% and 30% on two positions that I bought just over a year 
earlier (based in part on fundamentals). 

The technical picture showed a lot of support at or near B (a long-term 
upward price trend, the horizontal consolidation region at D and line F) and 
yet indications of a further decline (downward breakout from the three falling 
peaks pattern, confirmed head-and-shoulders top, busted diamond bottom, 
breaking trendline G support). 

The sale was a spectacularly bad call. The downward breakout from the 
three falling peaks pattern busted and the stock doubled in just over a year. 

You're either laughing that I made such a bad trade or your jaw is hang- 
ing open. Imagine how good Id look if the stock continued lower. Fortunately, 
I had the other half of my shares to play with. 


¢ Lesson: Before selling, try to estimate how far price will fall. I did that 
for this trade, but the stock ignored it. 


Sample Trade 951 


Sample Trade 


Consider how Melody traded the stock shown in Figure 61.6. The day after 
the stock staged an upward breakout from the December—February trading 
range (a rectangle top pattern), she bought, receiving a fill at 20. She did not 
know that a bear market (in the S&P 500 index) would begin in March 2000, 
a month after she bought. “I forgot to change the batteries on my crystal 
ball,” she said. 

Nothing along the way worried her about the stock’s performance. She 
viewed the retrace in an uptrend (March and April) when the bear market 
began as part of the normal stair-step climb that stocks make. 

Price pierced another rectangle top in May, suggesting continued strength 
in the stock, after it broke out upward. 

When price peaked at point 1 and dropped to A on high volume, she took 
notice. “My study of the markets suggested that large price swings on high vol- 
ume often mean a trend change.” When price made a third lower peak (3), she 
drew a trendline connecting the two valleys (A and B), forming an up-sloping 
trendline. The day after price closed below the line, she sold her holdings and 
received a fill at 34.27. She made 71% on the trade. 

The stock continued dropping, reaching a low of 1.02 in early September 
2002, for a decline of 97% below where she sold the stock. 

“The good news is the cash I made on this trade allowed me to buy a 
crystal ball that’s solar powered. I don’t need to replace the batteries anymore.” 


ADC Telecommunications (Telecom, Equipment, NASDAQ, sate 


And 
Bear Market ‘ ‘h wi i | i I : 


Begins | - 36 


yr ‘ = 30 
Nyy ht ee = 36 
HM 


Bought x i! 


Il HM = 18 
nga yl “16 


mut -14 


| 
ayy 


99 Dec Jan 00 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 61.6 When price pierced trendline AB, it confirmed the three falling peaks 
chart pattern, and that event was the sell signal. 


62 


Three Peaks and 
Domed House 


Pt 


In 1998, I funded an expedition to the local library and spent all day going 
through hundreds of books, looking for chart patterns for my proposal for this 
book. I found an article in The 1971 Encyclopedia of Stock Market Techniques by 
Investors Intelligence, Inc. titled, “The Three Peaks and the Domed House,” 
written by George Lindsay. 

When I searched for the pattern at home, I could see the examples he had 
listed for the indices, but a search of my stock charts didn’t reveal any patterns. 
So I didn’t include it in the first edition of this book, nor in the second edition. 
I changed my mind and include it here. 

Because this pattern is so complex, it’s rare. I know it appears in the Dow 
Jones Industrials, but it might not appear in individual stocks. As I mentioned, 
I couldn’t find any when I looked. Thus this chapter has a different format from 
the other chapters. It’s based on the information Lindsay provides in the article. 


Tour 


Figure 62.1 shows the basic model for the pattern. It wsually begins with a base 
(suggesting this is optional). What is the base? It is the start of the pattern. Beyond 
that, I have no idea except that Lindsay says it’s not important to the pattern. 
The base leads to a sharp advance that forms the first of three peaks. 
The peaks are often flat-looking, but on a bar chart that’s seldom the case. 
After the three peaks appear, a “separating decline” takes price much lower. 
It carves the three peaks from the rest of the pattern. The separating decline is 


952 


Identification Guidelines 953 


First Story 
Roof 
Three Peaks 


Separating 
Decline 


/ 


First Story 
Wall 


Base Domed House 


Figure 62.1 This is the three peaks and domed house model. 


important to the pattern, and it’ll help you find similar three peaks and domed 
house patterns. 

Price at the bottom of the separating decline consolidates and forms the 
foundation for the next pattern, the domed house. The house begins with a 
sharp but short rise that builds the first-story wall of the building. Following 
that, a choppy move becomes the roof of the first story. 

Price rises to the second story, forming the second-story wall. The wall 
leads to the dome, which may look like a head-and-shoulders top but is often 
an irregular shape. 

After the dome, price constructs the right wall of the second story, and 
on down to the wall of the first story. Lindsay makes a startling claim: “There 
has never been an exception to the rule that the entire gain in a Domed House 
has eventually been canceled.” In other words, point B will always drop to the 
price of point A (except when it doesn’t). 

If you imagine three peaks (not necessarily at the same price) followed 
by a domed house and a huge selloff, then that will go a long way to making 
this pattern familiar to you. In the historical record, I looked for the pattern 
backward. I found a big decline and then the domed house. The two-story 
house should stand alone and be tall. Then I looked to the left for the three 
peaks. The kicker is that the pattern is huge, about 2 years long. However, he 
provides examples that are much shorter. 

Now that you know what the bones look like, let’s examine the details of 
this unique pattern. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 62.1 shows identification guidelines for the three peaks and domed 
house pattern. Yes, it’s complicated until you remember that you’re looking for 
three peaks separated from a two-story house. 


954 Three Peaks and Domed House 


Points 


Table 62.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Discussion 


1,2 
3,5, 7 


4,6, 8 


8,9, 10 


10 
11-14 


14-23 or 27 


15 


15-20 


20-21 
21-25 


25-27 


27-28 


This is the base. It may or may not appear and has no significance. 


These points form the three peaks pattern. It’s not a triple top where price 
needs to peak near the same price. The shape of the peaks may be flat or 
pointed. The time between peak 3 and 7 is about 8 months. 


These are valleys between peaks 3, 5, and 7. The drop to the valley floor 
can be considerable (that is, the retrace of the move up from 2 to 3 can 
be large). 


This is the separating decline. Price drops in at least two selling waves (7 to 8 
and 9 to 10). The word least suggests there can be multiple selling waves, 
so be flexible. The separating decline divides the three peaks from the 
domed house, making both look squarish. 


Valley 10 is always lower than 4 or 6 and often lower than both. 


Price bottoms at 10 and then recovers to form at least two valleys that test 
the low at 10. The peaks and valleys here should look symmetrical, not 
irregular. 


The time from turn 14 to 23 should be 7 months and 8-to-10 days, but 
the measure from 14 can include peak 27. In other words, be flexible 
and don’t exclude a pattern because the duration is incorrect. If price 
at 12 or 14 fails to test the low at 10 (or 12 or 14 are absent), then 
try using valley 4 or 6 in the 7-month calculation to better predict the 
domed house peak. 


Price rises quickly and steeply to peak 15, forming the left wall of the 
first story. 


Look for price to form five waves here, 15-16, 16-17, and so on, ending 
at 19-20. Price bounces between peaks and valleys, forming the first- 
floor roof. 


This is the second story’s left wall. It’s the move up to 21 from 20. 
This is the dome of the house. Price forms another set of peaks and valleys, 
trying to move to a new high but failing. 


Price drops from 25 and forms a wave 26-27, which may mirror the roof 
from 15-20. Point 27, if tall enough, may be the right shoulder of a head- 
and-shoulders top formed by the move from 21-25. 


Price drops all the way back to the level of point 10 (or close to it). The drop 
may be a straight-line run down or it may have several retraces, but price 
will eventually make it to the price of 10 (in theory). 


Consider Figure 62.2, which is a pattern Lindsay highlights in the chap- 
ter. Turns 1 and 2 are the base Lindsay says to ignore as unimportant. Point 
2 leads to the first of three peaks, 3, 5, and 7, which includes valleys 4, 6, and 
8. Notice how point 4 in this example retraces the entire move up from 2 and 
more. Valleys 6 and 8 bottom near the same price. 


Identification Guidelines 955 


DJ 30 Industrials (‘DJl) 23 


1 4 : 
Dec Jan 47 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 48 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 62.2 This three peaks and domed house has a few variations. 


The drop from peak 7 takes price down to 10 but includes two waves, 
7-8 and 9-10. Point 10 must be lower than 4 or 6, that it is (it’s below 6 
but not 4). 

Valley 10 completes the “separating decline” that divides the three peaks 
from the domed house. If point 10 isn’t below either valley 4 or 6, then it’s not 
a separating decline and there may be another drop coming. Notice that the 
entire structure from 2 to 10 looks distinct, compact. 

Points 10 through 14 form a foundation for the first floor. Points 12 and 
14 attempt to return to the level of 10 but don’t make it down that far. That’s 
the test of the low at 10. In this example, it’s hard to see if the peaks and valleys 
look irregular or symmetrical. I suppose they share the same height and spac- 
ing, so that favors a symmetrical interpretation. 

Price makes a strong push higher to 15. In this example, though, the side- 
ways move from 15 to 20 is missing. This should be a 5-point turn, the roof of 
the first floor, but it’s not there. Lindsay says this means the domed house will 
be narrower than usual, and it is. 

The index rises to peak at 23 and forms a series of up-and-down moves 
that make up the dome on the second story. Price builds the second-story wall 
on the right of the house in the move down from 25 to 26. The retrace from 
26 to 27 is unusually steep. Lindsay says that the 7-month, 8-to-10-day span 
lasts in this example from points 14 to 27, not 14 to 23. 

After 27 the index tumbles to 28, completing the three peaks and domed 
house. 

Lindsay describes a miniature three peaks and domed house pattern on 
this chart. Peaks A, B, C are the three peaks, and the domed house is peak 3. 
The separating decline is the move down to D and it separates the three peaks 


956 Three Peaks and Domed House 


(ABC) from the domed house (3). The key to this mini-structure is the big 
decline from 3 to 4, which is a move similar to the drop from the mother ship 
of turns 23 to 28. 

He says that any of the three peaks (3, 5, 7) can support a mini-domed 
house pattern (in other time periods), like you see at ABC. He explains that 
when they occur, it’s often the last peak (7) instead of the first peak (3) where 
he sees small patterns form. 


1960 Example 


Figure 62.3 shows another example of a three peaks and domed house pat- 
tern provided by Lindsay. He says that the sideways move (of just over a dozen 
points from high to low) from September to November mirrored by the side- 
ways move from March to April means to be alert for a three peaks and domed 
house forming. Indeed, it did form. Lindsay says that even though the three 
peaks (3, 5, 7) are not on the same level, it’s clear after the large drop from 7 to 
10 that peaks 3, 5, and 7 are the operative ones. 

Remember the rule that valley 10 must be below either 4 or 6 or both? 
Here’s an example of the index dropping below both, completing the three 
peaks pattern. 

He explains that there’s a little three peaks pattern at ABC, which are the 
same as peaks 3-5-7 on the model. Point D is the same as 15 and peak 7 is the 
same as 23 on the model. After 7, of course, the index makes the dramatic move 
lower, mirroring the drop to 28 on the model. He says that the appearance of 
the smaller three peaks and domed house at ABC7 predicted the large drop 


Dj 30 Industrials (“DJI) 21 23 


= 994 
24, 25? = 986 


17 = 978 

19 27-2970 

a 2962 

7 15 7954 
1946 


4 = 938 
i = 930 


16 20 = 922 


D 
A BC 914 
3 i 1334 26 = 906 
f 9 ou byt = 898 
i ; = 890 
fis = 882 
\ 6 \ = 

\ - 874 
| = 866 
12 28 - 858 
_ 4 7850 
} - 842 
- 834 
2 10 - 826 

Oct Nov Dec Jan65 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan66 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 62.3 The three peaks don’t come close to sharing the same price in 
this example. 


Identification Guidelines 957 


(to 10) after point 7. When a three peaks and domed house pattern, either on 
the large or small scale, forms, a large decline follows. 

As for duration, he says that there should be at least two tests of the low at 
10 to build a satisfactory base, which should happen at 12 and 14, but don’t in 
this example. Turn 14 is too far away. Thus, to find peak 23, one should meas- 
ure the duration using point 10, and not 14, to calculate the 7-month 8-to- 
10-day span to peak 23. In this example the measure is 7 months and 12 days. 

He also says that he has used the low at 6 or even 4 in the tabulation to get 
the prediction to come out properly, and we’ve seen him use peak 27 instead 
of 23 in the equation. Because this idea is a way to determine when peak 23 
will happen, it’s worth considering. Imaging selling your holdings before price 
makes a dramatic plunge on the way down to turn 28. 

Returning to Figure 62.3, the index completes the climb to peak 23 and 
drops to 26, missing turns 24 and 25 along the way. The index continues lower 
to 28, completing a substantial decline from the peak at 23. 


1990 Example 


Figure 62.4 shows one example of a three peaks and domed house that 
formed at the start of the 1990s. Peaks 3, 5, and 7 are not at the same price 
level, but that is similar to the chart we just looked at. Indeed, if you think of 
turns A-3—5 as the three peaks with the separating decline down to valley 6, 
a small pattern unfolds. The domed house would be peak 7. Price goes down 
to 10, which on the model (Figure 62.1) is the same as point B, where the 
Dow bottoms. 


Dj 30 Industrials (“DJI) 23 
- 3002 
21 - 2968 
\ i - 2934 


\ - 2900 
i - 2866 
5 8 - 2832 
if \ . a 22 24 27.2798 
{ | - 2764 

Ww if - 2730 

r - 2696 


| y"16 26 
ee re 


- 2594 


- 2560 

\" i p 1 | - 2526 

y ati 6 |. 2492 
if Tt 23 - 2458 


- 2424 
ky! 2 - 2390 
1 - 2356 


Jun jul Aug Sep Oct Nov’ Dec Jan90 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep 


Figure 62.4 This is a more recent example of the three peaks and domed 
house pattern. 


958 Three Peaks and Domed House 


The bigger three peaks and domed house pattern has all of the turns 
marked. The separating decline from 7 to 10 shows a marked selloff, leaving 
the three peaks (3-5-7) distinct as the first half of the pattern. 

One can argue whether valley 12 is too far away from 10 to call it a test. 
Point 14 seems close enough, though. The base at 10 to 14 seems clear as a 
launch point for the rise to the first story. The first-floor roof appears at 15 to 
20, right where one would expect it to. The dome from 21 to 25 isn’t graceful, 
but it’s there. And, of course, the big decline to 28 is evident, too. 

Timing is off, though. Lindsay says the duration of peaks 3 to 7 should 
be 8 months, give or take. In this example, it’s about half that. Does that mean 
the distance from 14 to 23 should be half the expected 7 months, 8-10 days? 
Hmm. I guess not because eyeballing the duration comes in at about 5 months 
long, not 3.5 and not 7. 

Counting back 7 months from the peak at 23 gives a start location not 
at points 14 or 10, or 6 or 4, but at peak 7. No matter. I guess the key is to 
know that once the domed house begins to form, take measures to protect 
your holdings. 


2012 Example 


Figure 62.5 shows a chart from 2012 with another three peaks and domed 
house pattern. The base is at 1, 2, and price meanders up to the first peak of 
three, 3. This rise is unusually long, and the three peaks are too close together. 
Peaks 3 to 7 should be separated by 8 months, but these total about 2 months 


Dj 30 Industrials (“DJl) 


A ah Fé N, 22 241 fy : 

i vient , “13254 
wn ey PAW AY ee 
\ a |p A A i 
Arey Ay ‘ae 

it fa i H 18 20 28 -12684 
8 


» ihe | 11-14? -12304 
| E 
} + 10 12114 
| -11924 
; 


11 Nov Dec Jan12 Feb Mar Apr May Jun’ jul Aug Sep Oct Nov’ Dec Jan13 Feb 


Figure 62.5 The absence of the test of point 10 suggests to use turn 4 or 6 to 
predict the appearance of the domed house. 


Check Out 959 


long. I don’t know how Lindsay would justify that. He might say that this is not 
a three peaks and domed house pattern. That’s possible. 

However, the separating decline from 7 to 10 sets off the three peaks 
quite clearly. Points 11 to 14 appear as a tight congestion region and not a test 
of 10 at all. Does that mean we should use points 6 or 4 in the measure to pre- 
dict the appearance of the domed house? Recall peak 23 should be 7 months 
and 8 to 10 days from the bottom at 14. Since we have no 14, let’s use point 6 
and see what it says (which is a method he used in one of his charts). 

According to my spreadsheet, I found the number of days between 
1 January 2012 and 8 July 2012 (that is 7 months and 8 days) and added that 
to the date of valley 6 (10 April 2012). What’s the result? Answer: 16 October 
2012. The actual peak is at 5 October 2012. In other words, it missed the pre- 
diction by just 11 days. That’s useful. Very useful. 

The decline didn’t take the index down to the price level of 10, though. 
It did see the Dow drop 1,200 points, or almost 9%. 


Check Out 


Even though the three peaks and domed house pattern is rare, it still has value. 
I was surprised at how accurate the 7-month prediction from points 4, 6, or 
14 to peak 23 was. Seeing another three peaks and domed house pattern form 
may allow traders to buy protective puts on long positions, maybe sell some 
covered calls, or buy exchange-traded funds that short the indices. And when 
the index bottoms at point 28, they can jump in with a boatload of cash and 
ride the recovery. 

Lindsay also mentions the variation, domed house and three peaks, but 
it’s even rarer than the three peaks and domed house already discussed. I don’t 
include that variation in this edition of the book. Perhaps you can imagine it 
in your dreams. 


63 


Three Rising Valleys 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Three minor lows, each higher than the prior one, all with a similar shape. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish Short-term 
continuation bullish reversal 
Performance rank 6 out of 39 16 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 10% 12% 
Average rise 48% 24% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Throwbacks 66% 66% 
Percentage meeting 57% 30% 
price target 
See also Triple bottoms 


Like the three falling peaks chart pattern, Robert Fischer and Jens Fischer in 
their book, Candlesticks, Fibonacci, and Chart Pattern Trading Tools (Wiley, 2003), 
introduced me to the three rising valleys chart pattern. 

The performance from this chart pattern is quite good in bull markets, 
with a low failure rate (ranking eighth, not shown) and high average rise (rank- 
ing sixth, where 1 is best). In bear markets, the performance is about what you 


960 


Tour 961 


would expect from a countertrend breakout except that the failure rate is also 
quite good: eighth (where a rank of 1 has the fewest failures). 

Throwbacks occur in two out of three trades on average. That rate is high 
enough that you should expect one when you trade. 

Buckle your seatbelt and let’s take a tour. 


Tour 


What does a three rising valleys chart pattern look like? Figure 63.1 shows 
a good example of one. Most often, the pattern will appear in a rising price 
trend. The one shown, however, comes after a short-term downtrend (starting 
with the July peak). 

The three valleys in the figure are pronounced, and their lows almost 
follow a trendline upward (not shown). Three valleys following a trendline is 
not required for this pattern, but you may see it from time to time. Your eye 
tends to line up the valleys, so you will pick minor lows that seem similar to 
one another along that trend. 

Each valley (1, 2, 3) is a minor low, distinct, and pointed-looking. Valley 2 
is a bit more rounded-looking than the other two, but close enough. The three 
valleys Jook as if they should be part of the same pattern. 

The following section further discusses identification guidelines. 


Elk Corp (Building Materials, NYSE, ELK) 


y 


| fh 


ha 


ha 
\ it, 


Mh i 


[tnt \ a 


3 - 26 


oy! 1 fm | t o 
I 
| I (| f 
Ir hy - 24 
2 
l 


99 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 00 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 63.1 The three rising valleys chart pattern. 


962 Three Rising Valleys 


Identification Guidelines 


Figure 63.2 shows another example of the three rising valleys chart pattern. 
This one occurs well into the upward price trend, and there are others not 
shown in the figure that occurred earlier. Points 1, 2, and 3 mark the three val- 
leys (all of them minor lows). Each valley is above the prior one. Their shape is 
also similar—wide in this example, not narrow like the cluster in June (point A 
and to the right, for the next 3 weeks or so). 

The chart pattern confirms when price closes above the highest high in 
the pattern. I show the confirmation line on the chart. In this example, price 
throws back a few days after the breakout and then continues climbing until 
peaking in September. That peak marks the ultimate high for a rise of 34% in 
bear markets. That’s quite good. 

Figure 63.3 shows what a three rising valleys pattern (1, 2, 3) looks like 
in a downtrend. The pattern appears at the end of a measured move down 
chart pattern. 

Table 63.1 shows identification guidelines. 

Appearance. Each valley bottom must be above the prior valley, signal- 
ing a continued price rise. As the figure shows, however, the rise may be mea- 
ger, especially in bear markets. 


Administaff, Inc (Human Resources, NYSE, ASF) 


jl) 


a) 
yt 


My 

Ih | | 
witha wl | 
| tha onfirmation bp i | = 36 

mo ie "hi | | is 

a fo Po t\ 1H 

ri < 4 Throwback 

f ht 3 


iW 


hath, a ahve 
| Isl “thd \ 
1 


00 Feb Mar Apr = May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 63.2 Often, the three rising valleys chart pattern will appear in an upward 
price trend. 


Identification Guidelines 963 


Airgas, Inc (Chemical (Specialty), NYSE, ARG) 


| - 21 
i! - 20 
nu Wh ! 
Whi Nearby Overhead 19 
Resistance 


KAP ant Hy . 
! i , i | My i y a i rh | ei! , |- 17 
| 1 n I i | | sna { fg fl | [ ; 

2B ld r A f Hl lant 

| i if 7 i 

| 3 Ml | -14 


| V ~ 


- 12 


- 15 


02 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 03 


Figure 63.3. Three rising valleys appear in a downward price trend. Price confirms 
the pattern when it closes above the highest high. 


Table 63.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Look for three valleys; each one must be above the prior one and 
look similar. 
Price trend Look for three minor lows in a row, usually found in an uptrend. 
Proportion Each valley should look similar to the last one. If you begin with 


wide, rounded valleys, select only similar-looking ones. 


Breakout direction, | The breakout is upward by definition. Price breaks out when the 
confirmation stock closes above the highest peak in the chart pattern. An 
upward breakout confirms the pattern as valid. 


Price trend. Look for the pattern in an upward price trend. That is 
where they appear most often. Those appearing in uptrends (set by the closing 
price at the trend start compared to the pattern start) perform better, too (bull 
market only: 51% versus 45% average gain). 

Proportion. Each valley should look similar to the prior one. In the fig- 
ure, the three minor lows are 3 days wide. In Figure 63.2, the turns are more 
graceful, wider, and the minor lows are more significant. Avoid mixing a wide 
minor low with a narrow one. 


964 Three Rising Valleys 


The statistics shown in this chapter assume each valley appears like the 
other two. It may be that mixing bottom shapes like points 1, 2, and A in 
Figure 63.2 will succeed (or even perform better), but the figure gives one 
example of the decline you would suffer as price dropped to valley 3 (a 16% 
decline from the high at A). 

Breakout direction, confirmation. By definition, the breakout is always 
upward when price closes above the tallest peak in the pattern. If price first 
closes below the lowest low in the pattern, then it’s not a valid three rising 
valleys pattern. 

Confirmation happens when price closes above the highest high in the 
pattern. It confirms the three valleys as a valid chart pattern. Always wait for 
confirmation unless you have a compelling reason for entering early. Entering 
the trade sooner increases your risk, especially if price was trending down 
leading to the start of the chart pattern. 

There are exceptions, of course, and the Trading Tactics section 
discusses them. Figure 63.3 shows an example of when getting in sooner 
reduces your risk and increases profits. When the peak between valleys 2 and 
3 is below the highest high, then the last peak (point A) serves as the new 
confirmation price. In the example shown in the figure, that would change a 
2% profit into a 12% one. That’s not much, but you can make a million bucks 
by saving pennies. 


Focus on Failures 


Like all chart patterns, three rising valleys fails from time to time. Figure 63.3 
shows one example. The minor lows marked 1, 2, and 3 show the three valleys 
of the pattern; each low is above the prior one. The minor lows look similar in 
shape, with narrow spikes in this case. The pattern confirms when price closes 
above the highest high (shown as the confirmation line). Price rises just above 
the line and then tumbles. 

Why did this rising valley fail? I find it valuable to look at the big pic- 
ture before zooming in. Since the pattern begins at point 1, I would notice 
the measured move down pattern marked by turns BC (the first leg), the 
corrective phase, CD, and the second down leg, D1. After a measured move 
down, the most common retrace is a climb back into the corrective phase, CD. 
After that, a resumption of the original trend (downward in this example) is 
a good bet. 

Since the corrective phase (CD) is a solid block of horizontal price 
movement, it presents a formidable challenge to any price mountaineer will- 
ing to attempt the climb. I would not invest in this pattern because of that 
resistance and the likelihood of price dropping, resuming the downtrend. 
Price climbed to overhead resistance set up by the corrective phase and then 
ran for cover. 


Statistics 965 


Statistics 


Table 63.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I uncovered a pile of these patterns (3,580 in 353 stocks), 
starting from the first one in December 1995 and the most recent in March 
2019. Not all stocks covered the entire range, and some stocks no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. In bull markets, the pat- 
tern acted as a continuation pattern, but not decisively so (it’s near random). 
In bear markets, reversals won the battle in two out of three contests. 

Reversal/continuation performance. In bull markets, continuations 
perform better than reversals, but the situation flips in bear markets: continu- 
ations perform slightly worse. 

Average rise. The average rise is 48% in bull markets and half that in 
bear markets. That’s an intriguing result. Both have upward breakouts, but the 
bull market sees price do twice as well as the bear market. Does the phrase, 
4 rising tide lifts all boats ring a bell? I’ve used it often enough in this book (sorry 
about that, but it’s all I could think of), and this is an example of what it means. 
When a stock rises in a bull market, expect the climb to be higher than the rise 
in a bear market. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The general market helped push price 
higher in bull markets (a lot, apparently) and hurt it in bear markets. 

Days to ultimate high. It takes considerably longer in bull markets 
to reach the ultimate high than in bear markets, as the table shows. Velocity 
check: The rise in bear markets is 2.1 times faster than the one in bull mar- 
kets. Who knew? 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many patterns see 
price rise more than 20% after the breakout. I consider values above 50% 
to be peachy, even tubular. The bull market result does fine, but the bear 
market one is below the average for other bearish chart pattern types (which 
is 46%). 

Table 63.3 shows failure rates for the three rising valleys pattern. The 
bull market numbers are better than the bear market ones. For example, 10% 


Table 63.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 
Reversal, continuation performance 


Average rise 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change 
Days to ultimate high 
How many change trend? 


3,061 

48% R, 52% C 
45% R, 51% C 
48% 

16% 

351 

61% 


519 

68% R, 32% C 
25% R, 23% C 
24% 

-1% 

83 

42% 


966 Three Rising Valleys 


Table 63.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 297 or 10% 63 or 12% 
10 363 or 22% 105 or 32% 
15 291 or 31% 68 or 45% 
20 242 or 39% 65 or 58% 
25 178 or 45% 43 or 66% 
30 169 or 50% 40 or 74% 
35 180 or 56% 29 or 80% 
50 358 or 68% 52 or 90% 
75 391 or 81% 27 or 95% 
Over 75 592 or 100% 27 or 100% 


of bull market patterns fail to see price rise more than 5% after the breakout. 
This figure doubles to 22% failing to see price rise more than 10%. In bear 
markets, over half the patterns fail to rise more than 20%. 

Despite what appears to be an alarming increase in failures for small 
price moves, the numbers are quite reasonable when compared to other 
chart patterns. 

What do the numbers mean? If your cost of trading is 5% and you want 
to make 15% (20% total), how often does the three rising valleys pattern fail? 
Answer: 39% in bull markets and 58% in bear markets. The result says to 
avoid trading this pattern in bear markets. 

Of course, you will not trade each pattern perfectly and your losers will 
pull down your average gain, so you will have to allow for that. Trade the pat- 
tern on paper (or use a trading simulator) and see if you can make money con- 
sistently. If you cannot show a paper profit, then either you are doing it wrong 
or you should marry someone with lots of money. 

Table 63.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, a valid three rising valleys chart pat- 
tern always has an upward breakout. Don’t be fooled by cheap imitations. 

Yearly position, performance. The best performing patterns have 
breakouts near the yearly high. Well, sometimes. It’s only true in bull markets. 
In bear markets, it’s the reverse with those near the yearly low doing best. 
Avoid those in the middle range, though, for both market conditions. 

Throwbacks. Throwbacks occur often, every two out of three trades, and 
it takes 12 days on average for the stock to return to the breakout price. After 
a throwback completes, the majority of the time, the stock resumes trending 
upward. That’s especially true in bull markets with 81% starting to recover. 

Gaps. A breakout day gap helps performance in both bull and bear 
markets. That finding agrees with market lore. And the thing is, I measured 


Statistics 967 


Table 63.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Breakout direction 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the 


100% up 


L 45%, M 42%, 


100% up 


L 27%, M 22%, 


12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H 49% H 24% 
Throwbacks occurrence 66% 66% 
Average time to throwback peaks 5% in 6 days 8% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 48% 25% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 48% 23% 
Percentage price resumes trend 81% 69% 
Performance with breakout day gap 49% 27% 
Performance without breakout day gap 48% 24% 
Average gap size $0.94 $0.58 


Table 63.5 
Size Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 47% 26% 
Short pattern performance 49% 23% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 22.4% 27.6% 
Narrow pattern performance 47% 28% 
Wide pattern performance 49% 21% 
Median width 87 days 72 days 
Short and narrow performance 48% 27% 
Short and wide performance 49% 15% 
Tall and wide performance 48% 23% 
Tall and narrow performance 46% 31% 


performance from the opening price the day after a gap occurred. Thus, you can 
buy after a gap appears and ride the stock for better performance (on average). 
Table 63.5 shows pattern size statistics. 
Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones but only in bear 
markets. That’s disappointing because height is the best predictor of future 
performance that I’ve found. Measure the height of the chart pattern from 


968 Three Rising Valleys 


tallest peak to lowest valley and divide by the breakout price. If the result is 
greater than the median shown in the table, then you have a tall pattern. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better in bull markets and narrow ones do 
substantially better in bear markets. I used the median length, not the average, 
as the separator between narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. You'll want to avoid trading bull mar- 
ket patterns that are both tall and narrow. They perform worst. Tall and nar- 
row patterns in bear markets perform best. Isn’t that odd? Patterns both short 
and wide outperform in bull markets and do worst in bear markets. 

Hold on. Let me check the numbers. 

Yup. They are correct. The bull market samples are more than 500 for 
each row, so they are solid. The bear market samples are far fewer. They start 
at 89 and go up to 171. My guess is additional samples for bear markets would 
iron things out. 

Table 63.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward in almost two of every three 
patterns. I found that by using linear regression, by the way. 

Rising/Falling volume. Patterns with volume trending upward perform 
better than do those with it trending downward, but only in bear markets. 

Breakout day volume. Below-average (light) breakout volume helps 
performance. Of course, that contradicts trading lore. In fact, some believe 
that if breakout volume isn’t heavy, then you should avoid trading the pattern. 
I don’t put as much faith in volume as they do. Volume isn’t that good of an 
indicator of future performance. 

Table 63.7 shows how often price reached a stop location. Because this 
pattern can be tall, you’ll find it rare that price will meander down to the mid- 
dle or bottom of the chart pattern to snag a stop-loss order placed there. How- 
ever, I only checked from the breakout to the ultimate high. So if you hang 
onto your stock beyond the ultimate high, the stock could drop and trigger the 
stop-loss order. 

Table 63.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. This chart pattern performed best in the 2000s 
and worst in the 1990s, but the results are close to each other. Perhaps they 
are brothers? 


Table 63.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 64% down 65% down 
Rising volume trend performance 48% 28% 
Falling volume trend performance 48% 22% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 47% 24% 


Light breakout volume performance 50% 26% 


Statistics 969 


Table 63.7 
How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 81% 79% 
Middle 13% 9% 
Pattern bottom 1% 0% 

Table 63.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 45% 
2000s 50% 
2010s 47% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 8% 
2000s 8% 
2010s 11% 

Table 63.9 

Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 422 or 14% 120 or 23% 
Single bust count 275 or 65% 98 or 82% 
Double bust count 122 or 29% 14 or 12% 
Triple+ bust count 25 or 6% 8 or 7% 
Performance for all busted patterns -15% -21% 
Single busted performance -20% -25% 


Failures over time. The 2010s showed a slight uptick in failures. It’ll be 
interesting to see how this pattern behaves in the 2020s and beyond. 

Table 63.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Comparatively few three rising valleys bust. As 
one would expect, the bear market is much tougher on performance than is the 
bull market. Bear market patterns are rare, but they bust more frequently than 
those in bull markets. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the number of busts into single, double, 
and more than two (triple+) busts. Single busts happen most often followed 
by double and triple+ busts. That’s not always the case, though. I’ve seen other 
chart patterns where triple+ busts place second for frequency. 


970 Three Rising Valleys 


Busted and non-busted performance. I don’t have a non-busted three 
rising valleys pattern to compare against, not because I don’t have them in 
stock. Rather, it’s because they don’t exist. So, we can only compare the busted 
performance with all busted types (single, double, and triple+) and single 
busted patterns. Single busted patterns nearly always beat the other types. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 63.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule sets a target price, so we can 
check the probability of price reaching the target. 

To use it, compute the formation height and add the result to the 
breakout price. For example, the three rising valleys marked 1, 2, and 3 in 
Figure 63.5 use the price difference between points 7 ($9.52) and 1 ($7.38) for 
a height of 2.14. Add the height to the breakout price (the highest high) to get 
a target of 11.66. The stock hits the target in early March. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often this works. In this 
example, we used the full height in a bull market. The table shows price reaches 
the target 57% of the time, on average. Thus, you might want to cut the height 
in half or more to get a closer, more reliable target. 


Table 63.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the formation height (highest high minus lowest low) and 
add it to the highest high. The result is the target price. The bottom 
portion of this table shows how often it works. 

Early entry If the pattern has the highest high between the first two valleys, use 
the last peak (between the last two valleys) in the chart pattern as 
the breakout price. 

Trendline break = A close above a down-sloping trendline joining the highs between the 
valleys can serve as the breakout price. 


Wait for Wait for price to confirm the pattern. Usually this event is a close above 
confirmation the highest high. 

Stop location See Table 63.7 for guidance. 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 

Percentage reaching quarter height target 88% 81% 

Percentage reaching half height target 75% 59% 

Percentage reaching full height target 57% 30% 


Percentage reaching 2x height target 38% 13% 


Experience 971 


As a check on the projected gain, turn the height into a percentage 
move. In this example, the height of 2.14 as a percentage of the high (9.52) 
would mean a rise of 22%. Table 63.3 indicates that 39% will fail to rise 
more than 20% (the closest row to 22%) in a bull market. That finding 
means fewer than 61% will hit the target. If the success rate is too low, then 
reduce your target price and look for nearby overhead resistance where price 
might stall. 

Early entry. Usually, the highest high in the pattern marks the break- 
out price. Sometimes, like that shown in Figure 63.3, the highest high occurs 
between the first two valleys. Use the high between the second and third valley 
(point A in this case) as the confirmation price. That strategy will get you into 
the trade sooner than using the highest high. 

Trendline break. You can also use a down-sloping trendline drawn 
between the two peaks in the pattern. Figure 63.5 shows an example as the 
top of a symmetrical triangle. Buy when price closes above the down-sloping 
trendline for the three rising valleys pattern marked 4, 5, 6. 

Wait for confirmation. Whichever method you use to determine the 
breakout price, always wait for confirmation (that is, wait for the breakout). 
Most of the time, a breakout will be a close above the highest high in the pat- 
tern. An early entry or trendline break also confirms the pattern. Not waiting 
for confirmation is a game best left to amateurs and novice traders because of 
the low probability of success. 

Stop location. Before placing a stop, review how often various locations 
will trigger a stop using Table 63.7. 


Experience 


I don’t trade this chart pattern much at all. I think that by the time the pattern 
confirms, price has risen much too far off the bottom to be useful. However, 
here’s a three rising valleys trade I made in Freeport-McMoRan Copper and 
Gold (FCX), which I show in Figure 63.4. 

Price drops from a complex head-and-shoulders top in March, shown as 
LS (left shoulder), Head (2) (dual head), and RS (right shoulder). The pattern 
confirms as valid when price closes below the neckline (I) and price drops all 
the way down to 1. 

The three rising valleys pattern appears as turns 1, 2, and 3, with each val- 
ley higher than the prior one. 

Do the valleys look similar? That’s open to debate. Valleys 1 and 3 look 
similar in that they are wide and squareish looking. Contrast 1 and 3 with val- 
ley 2. Valley 2 looks narrow and pointed. The three valleys follow an upward 
trendline (1, 2, 3, shown) that is reassuring from an aesthetics viewpoint. It /ooks 
nice. The three valleys look as if they belong together. 


972 Three Rising Valleys 


Head (2) Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold B (FCX) 


A AA oH - 
| WAG ; E iy TW - 20 
i ! aly vi ul i ull | ‘4 9 
| h ke a i Mi ‘\ Ui " 


[o} 


04 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug sep Oct Nov Dec JanO5 Feb 


Figure 63.4 This three rising valleys chart pattern didn’t work as expected. 


The pattern confirms as a valid three rising valleys when price closes above 
the top of the pattern. The top is at line C. At D, the stock breaks out upward. 

Did I buy at the open the next day? Nooo! Why not? I have no idea. 
Instead, I waited to buy until A. Yes, that’s right. I bought on the day price 
peaked. I didn’t buy at the open. Rather, I entered the trade a few hours after 
the market opened, so I received a fill at 18.08, slightly above the close on 
that day. 

My notebook for the trade said overhead resistance was at 19.50. I show 
that on the chart as E, the circled area with a horizontal line extending to the 
right. It loomed as a ceiling, preventing a price advance. 

I placed a stop at 16.93 or 6% below the buy price. 

Here’s what I wrote in my notebook: “Buy reason: 3 rising valleys chart 
pattern. [The stock] is rising above a flag in April but is encountering resist- 
ance. This may stall out and tumble, but the other stocks in the industry are 
recovering. Relative strength says copper is #1. I feel like this trade is not 
going to work.” 

I’m a bit mystified as to where the flag is. I show one at F. The flag is 
well below the buy price, so maybe I wrote flag when I meant pennant (G). 
If I meant pennant, then yes, price was encountering resistance there (peak D 
aligns with G). 

Here are words I don’t like to read: “I feel like this trade is not going 
to work.” 

I don’t write much about the inner voice a trader has, but it’s important. 
It’s the voice in your head that speaks to you (call it intuition). When your 
enthusiasm is soaring, it’s the calmer voice whispering the warnings. 


Experience 973 


When trading, I find it’s often correct, but it can be difficult to distinguish 
the correct whisper from the shouted warnings of the incorrect ones. Unfor- 
tunately it’s rare that I’ll be able to separate it from everything else going on 
and obey it. 

It’s a lot like a premonition, a voice that warns something bad is going to 
happen. How many times has it warned you that you’re going to drop some- 
thing, the phone is going to ring, or you'll spill something, and then, thirty 
seconds later, it happens? 

The trading voice is a whisper signaling a note of caution. Sometimes it’s 
loud enough to reach my consciousness and I write it down, like I did in my 
notebook: “This trade is not going to work.” 

Wish I had listened. 

Returning to the trade, the stock hit my stop-loss order at the open and 
took me out of the trade at 16.90 just two trading days after I entered. Here’s 
my trading notebook: “I didn’t think I'd be stopped out. At first, the loss didn’t 
bother me [but], then I got mad. I got a quote and saw that the stock dropped 
to 16.53, a massive decline of 1.15 [$2.29 split unadjusted] from the prior close, 
and that made me feel better. Price was rebounding, but still below my stop 
(16.93) and below where the stock sold (16.90). These things happen. Sell 
reason: Stopped out. That’s a 3-day drop from 18 to 16.50. Ouch.” 

I sold at the opening price, B, and lost 7% on the trade. The stock con- 
tinued down 7% below my sell price and 13% below the buy price. If I didn’t 
use a stop, I could have lost 13% (worst case). 

What did I do wrong? 


¢ Lesson: Entry was much too late, with price climbing too far above 
the optimum entry. The optimum entry was the opening price the day 
after the breakout (the day after D, not A) or using a buy stop to enter 
a penny above line C. 

¢ Lesson: Was the stop located properly? I believe I placed the stop 
below a minor low situated between peaks D and A and below round- 
number support at 17 (stop placed at 16.93). Given that I took a loss, it 
kept the loss to 7% when it could have been as much as 13%. So I think 
it was properly placed. 

¢ Lesson: What was the target? I didn’t dwell on this in my notebook, 
which was a mistake. I only made mention of overhead resistance at E, 
19.50. That didn’t allow for much profit, but my guess is this wasn’t 
a swing trade but rather intended as an investment, for a longer term 
hold. The ultimate high, H, was 21.27 or 17.6% above my buy price. 
That’s fine for a perfect swing trade, but real life suggests I wouldn’t 
sell there, so I often shoot for a higher target (like doubling my money) 
for a longer term hold. I didn’t mention what the target was. In other 
words, besides a stop, I had no exit plan. 


974 _ Three Rising Valleys 


Sample Trade 


Joshua made the trade shown in Figure 63.5. In late October (after an upward 
breakout), he noticed the three rising valleys pattern labeled 1, 2, and 3. Since 
price at point 4 dropped below point 3, it made him nervous trading the pat- 
tern. However, he liked that price tested the point 1 low (at 4) but rebounded 
(one of three conditions signaling a trend change; the other two being price 
pushing up through a down-sloping trendline and a close above a prior 
minor high). 

He waited to buy the stock until the trend direction became clear. At 
point 6, he saw the second three rising valleys chart pattern (4, 5, 6). Then 
he noticed the symmetrical triangle, created by drawing trendlines along the 
price peaks and valleys. Looking to the left, the turns at 3 and 7 connect with 
the symmetrical triangle to form a weird-looking diamond. 

He found that the stock was in a bull market (good) with a rising S&P 500 
index (good); the breakout was in the middle of the yearly price range (bad); 
and the pattern was short and wide (good). The commodity channel index 
(CCD issued a buy the day before the breakout, but the relative strength index 
(Wilder RSI) remained neutral. In short, he faced a mixed technical picture. 


Claires Stores (Retail (Special Lines), NYSE, CLE) A 
- 18 
B -17 


Cc 
; Hy that 4 - 16 
Flag al! ull th by a 


i Confirmation y. 14 


rh Line ae 


Sold -~12 


- 13 


i 


Bought 


ty 
i Mi, ul Symmetrical 
we fl 


ty Triangle 
1 fh, | 
fl 1 


I ul 
i" \, 


98 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 63.5 A three rising valleys pattern turned into a symmetrical triangle. 
As described in the Sample Trade, Joshua sold the stock when it started sinking 
lower with technical indicators showing divergence. 


Sample Trade 975 


“T used the trendline break to signal an entry.” When price closed above 
a trendline, connecting the peaks in the pattern, he bought and received a 
fill at 9.20. 

He used the measure rule to predict a price target and came up with 
11.66, the same height as the July top (far left). Ifhe sold at that price, he would 
make 27%. Just below that was a solid line of resistance from March to May 
1998 (not shown), at a price of 10.80 and rising to about 12. He suspected that 
the resistance zone would cause a throwback. 

“T used a limit order to sell at 11.47,” below the predicted target of 11.66 
and below 11.50, where everyone else would put their orders. If triggered, he 
would make 25%. 

Over the coming days, he watched the stock reach the resistance zone 
and then come tumbling down. It completed a throwback in mid-January. 
Fortunately, price rewarded his patience when it resumed climbing. 

It formed another symmetrical triangle, and when it broke out upward, 
“T removed the limit order. Why? Because the measure rule from the triangle 
[13.16] was above my sell price, I didn’t want to limit profits in case it 
was correct.” 

Price hit the new target but kept going up, pausing at D. Then it created 
a flag pattern that predicted a target of 16.19. Price hit that target 2 days 
after it pierced the top flag trendline. Price peaked at A and then made two 
successively lower lows, B and C. This was a three falling peaks pattern, and it 
spelled trouble. 

“I checked my two favorite indicators, RSI and CCI. The RSI was in 
overbought range since March, showing a horizontal movement even as price 
climbed. CCI was even more dramatic. It peaked in March and then made 
successively lower peaks in April through May.” That divergence, where price 
moved up but the indicator moved down, signaled a sale. 

The day after price pierced the three falling peaks confirmation line (the 
lowest low in the pattern), he sold and received a fill at 13.77 for a gain of 
50% in about 4 months. The stock continued lower and reached bottom in 
October at 7.38. 


64 


Triangles, Ascending 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A triangle shape with horizontal top and up-sloping bottom. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 


Breakeven failure rate 

Average rise 

Volume trend 

‘Throwbacks 

Percentage meeting price target 


See also 


Downward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 
Performance rank 


Breakeven failure rate 
Average drop 
Volume trend 
Pullbacks 


Percentage meeting price target 


976 


Long-term bullish continuation 
16 out of 39 


17% 
43% 
Downward 
64% 
70% 


Head-and-shoulders tops, three 
rising valleys, triple tops 


Short-term bearish reversal 
30 out of 36 


38% 
13% 
Downward 
63% 
44% 


Tour 977 


Have you ever heard someone say, “I just happened to be in the right place at 
the right time”? Perhaps you have even said it yourself. Investing is a lot like 
that—being in the right stock just before it takes off. The ascending triangle 
can show you where the right place is at the right time. 

However, the Results Snapshot shows a pattern that doesn’t perform up 
to the hype. The best performance rank is 16, where 1 is best, and that’s for 
upward breakouts in bull markets. Downward breakouts are even worse, so 
don’t go there. The breakeven failure rate rank (not shown) is dreadful for 
both up and down breakouts, ranking 27 and 35 (next to last), respectively. 

At one time, this chart pattern used to be one of my favorites but no longer. 
It just doesn’t perform as well as ’'d hoped. Don’t let my experience persuade 
you. Maybe you'll have better luck, especially in your market and using your 
trading style. Let’s take a tour of the pattern first before I discuss the details. 


Tour 


Figure 64.1 shows a good example of an ascending triangle. A horizontal 
trendline drawn across the minor highs and an up-sloping trendline connect- 
ing the minor lows form the characteristic triangular pattern. Volume dimin- 
ishes as price bounces between resistance at the top and support at the bottom 
of the pattern. A premature breakout gives a hint of the coming action; less 
than 2 weeks later, price breaks out again and moves higher. 


CUC International (Financial Services, NYSE, CU) 


Ultimate High 


| —26 
I 


TT 

\ WV - 

fu jul ly jl! 23 
iL, I 239 

Premature Breakout ' 


r Holt - 20 


7H n Triangle Apex 
wh = 
aut 


1 
IW 
ie : 


| 
OPN WHUAUADN WOO 


May 93 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 64.1 The horizontal top and up-sloping trendline on the bottom mark 
the boundaries of this bullish triangle. The premature breakout on high volume 
is often indistinguishable from the real breakout. The volume trend is downward 
until the premature breakout. 


978 Triangles, Ascending 


Why do ascending triangles form? Imagine you are the manager of a 
large mutual fund. Over the years your fund has purchased several hundred 
thousand shares of the company shown in the figure. After seeing the stock 
rise for almost a year, you are getting nervous about continuing to hold it. You 
believe the stock is trading well above its fair market value, and you have spot- 
ted a more promising situation in another company. 

You tell the trading department to dump all of your shares as long as it 
receives at least 18.50. For 2 days, starting on 4 June 1993, the trading depart- 
ment sells shares. Since your fund has a large block to get rid of, the price can- 
not climb much above 18.50 without the fund selling shares and forcing price 
down. The selling puts a ceiling on the stock. 

Word gets around that you are selling, and other institutional investors 
jump on the bandwagon and sell, too. Their aggressive selling satiates demand, 
and the stock starts declining. It tumbles to a low of 16.25 on 9 June, where 
buying demand halts the decline. Buyers, viewing the price of the stock as 
a steal, demand more shares. The buying pressure turns the decline around 
and price starts rising—quickly at first but more slowly as additional investors 
become willing to sell their shares. 

When the stock hits 18.50 again on 16 June, your fund sells more shares, 
effectively halting the advance. The stock struggles at that level for 3 days. Again, 
the selling pressure forces price down, and it crosses to the other side of the 
now-forming ascending triangle. Price rebounds one last time and hits the sell 
zone and stays there for about a week before being turned away by excess sup- 
ply. A call from the trading department confirms they sold the entire position. 

Without an overhanging supply to halt the stock’s rise, price gaps up on 
increasing demand and soars to 19.25. Your fund is out of the picture, but 
the forces of supply and demand are not finished with the stock. Others still 
selling their shares force the stock back down into the triangle. Price races to 
the other side of the triangle, rebounds off the lower trendline, and marches 
out the top. 

If I had to sum up the price action of an ascending triangle, I would say it 
forms because of a supply of shares available at a fixed price. Once the supply 
depletes, shares quickly break out of the triangle and move higher. If demand 
continues to be strong, price rises. Otherwise, the stock collapses back on itself 
and either regroups for another try or continues down. 


Identification Guidelines 


Finding an ascending triangle in a chart of daily price data is simple, perhaps 
too simple. I read a tutorial in a popular magazine in which nearly half the 
illustrations purporting to be triangles were identified incorrectly. 

If you have any doubt about the validity of a chart pattern, others may 
share those doubts. If others do not see the same shapes you do, the pattern 


Identification Guidelines 979 


may not work as well as you expect. Under those circumstances, where there 
is some doubt about correct identification, do not trade the chart pattern. Save 
your money for a trade where you are sure the pattern is valid. I discuss iden- 
tification problems later in this section. For now, Table 64.1 lists ascending 
triangle characteristics. 

Appearance. The triangle pictured in Figure 64.1 is nearly a classic 
example of an ascending triangle. The horizontal top line of resistance repels 
price, and it rebounds off a steadily rising support line below. The two con- 
verging trendlines, one horizontal and the other sloping up, outline a trian- 
gular shape. The ascending trendline predicts a rise in price, hence the name 
ascending triangle. 

The only problem with this triangle is with the (premature) breakout. 
If the pattern had behaved itself, the stock would have continued higher instead 
of going back into the triangle for more work to do. 

Trendlines. Price should touch (or near) the trendlines a total of five or 
more times. That’s three touches of one trendline and two on the other. Each 
touch should be a minor high or minor low. If price slices through the trend- 
line at the start of the triangle, it’s not a valid touch because it doesn’t occur at 
a minor high or low. The five-touch rule helps prevent identifying bogus pat- 
terns. [’ll explain common flubs later. 

Crossing pattern. Price should cross the pattern several times, not hug 
one of the trendlines like a tightrope walker. The pattern should be filled with 
price movement, not whitespace. Cutting off a price turn and calling it a trian- 
gle is a common selection error. 


Table 64.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Two price trendlines, the top one horizontal and the bottom one 
sloping up, form a triangle pattern. The two lines join at the triangle 
apex. 

Trendlines The top trendline in the pattern is horizontal. The one on the bottom 


slopes upward. Price must touch the two trendlines a total of five 
or more times (three on one trendline and two on the other). Each 
touch should be a minor high or minor low. 


Crossing pattern Price should cross the triangle several times, covering the whitespace 
with price movement. 


Premature Somewhat prone to premature breakouts, both up and down. Volume 
breakouts on a false breakout is also heavy, just as the genuine breakout. 

Breakout The breakout can be up or down. It occurs a median of 64% of the way 
direction to the triangle’s apex. 

Volume Volume is heavier at the start of the triangle than near its end. Volume 


is usually low just before the breakout, but need not be. 


980 Triangles, Ascending 


Premature breakouts, breakout direction. How can you be sure the 
breakout is not a premature one? You cannot. A premature breakout happens 
when price closes (or even the high price pokes its nose) outside the boundary 
of one of the trendlines. After a few days, price returns to the confines of the 
triangle and eventually breaks out for good by moving outside the trendline. 

Volume on premature breakouts is indistinguishable from normal break- 
outs, and both occur at about the same distance to the triangle apex. I don’t 
worry about premature breakouts anymore. In fact, I consider them as the 
actual breakout, providing price closes outside the trendline boundary. 

Volume. As the triangle forms, volume is heavy at first but tapers off until 
the day of the breakout. Often volume is abnormally low a few days before the 
breakout, as if the triangle is gathering strength for the final push. When the 
breakout comes, volume can rise substantially and usually does, but heavy break- 
out day volume is not a prerequisite. 


Identification Challenges 


By now you may feel comfortable with correctly identifying an ascending tri- 
angle. However, there are some situations that may fool people new to the 
pattern. Figure 64.2 shows the first one. Cover up the right half of the figure 
and ask yourself if what you see on the left looks like an ascending triangle. 


Baker Hughes (Oilfield Svcs./Equipment, NYSE, BHI) 


-24 


WW AA i 


lh 

(l = 
i ss 
4 ( "ay “19 


Minor Lows 


Nov 92 Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr 92 Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 64.2 Two views of an incorrectly identified ascending triangle. What looks 
like an ascending triangle on the left is not a valid triangle on the right. The three 
downward spikes in December, identified by the numbers near the top of the figure, 
mark a head-and-shoulders bottom with a horizontal neckline, not a triangle. 


Identification Challenges 981 


The horizontal line, drawn to rest on top of the central peak, extends to 
the left and right until it intersects price. Although the lower trendline has 
several instances where price declines to and bounces off from the trendline, 
the top trendline does not show the same type of touches. 

Looking at the right side of the chart, does this still look like an ascend- 
ing triangle? I can hear you asking me to lower the horizontal trendline until it 
touches the two minor highs in early to mid-December (below number 1 and 
midway between numbers 2 and 3—at the top of the chart). That is not a bad 
guess, but it results in just four trendline touches and not five. 

What you are really looking at is a head-and-shoulders bottom. The left 
shoulder has a large volume spike (under number 1). Located under number 2, 
the head shows a smaller volume spike. The right shoulder shows volume that 
recedes even further (number 3). A true ascending triangle has at least five 
trendline touches, three on one trendline and two on the other. This pattern 
only has one top trendline touch at the central minor high. At the start and end 
of the pattern, price touches the top trendline but not at a minor high, so the 
two touches doesn’t count. It’s not a valid ascending triangle. 

Figure 64.3 shows another example of a falsely identified ascending 
triangle. This chart has too much whitespace in the central portion of the 
triangle. A well-defined ascending triangle has price that bounces from top to 
bottom plenty of times, filling the whitespace. 

Study the figure. It illustrates one of the most common identifica- 
tion mistakes. Novices will find a rounding bottom (like that shown from 


Brinker International (Restaurant, NYSE, EAT) 


Ih 


Too Much Whitespace jbl 


-19 


iy a 
"hl ‘ 


1 va I, 


Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 64.3 This pattern is not a valid ascending triangle. There are not enough 
crossings between the two trendlines to illustrate a valid triangle construction. The 
minor highs and lows are numbered. 


982 Triangles, Ascending 


January to March) and draw a horizontal line across the top and another 
tangent to the bottom price action, then yell, “Eureka! An ascending triangle!” 

Wrong. 

Contrast Figure 64.3 with Figure 64.4. Figure 64.4 sees price crossing 
the pattern a number of times, erasing the whitespace. Even though price does 
not rise very far before throwing back to the triangle apex and moving down, 
it is still a nicely formed ascending triangle. Also note the generally decreasing 
volume trend, especially near the breakout. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 64.4 shows the first failure type: a 5% failure. Strictly speaking this is 
not a 5% failure (because price climbs 6%), but it is typical of what one looks 
like. A 5% failure happens when price breaks out and moves no more than 5% 
before curling around and shooting out the other side of the triangle. 

In this case, price leaves the triangle at 6.13 and reaches a high of 6.50—a 
6% move before dropping and closing below the bottom of the pattern, bust- 
ing the upward breakout. 

Most failures of this type have two causes. The first is overhead resist- 
ance, and it is easy to spot. Look for peaks or valleys sharing a common price 
or a solid block of horizontal price movement. Chart patterns, trendlines, and 


Tultex Corp (Apparel, NYSE, TTX) 


i" Pullback -6 


| 
j hPa 


Jun 95 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 64.4 An excellent example of a correctly constructed ascending triangle. 
The number of minor highs and lows is good, and there are plenty of crossings 
from the top trendline to the bottom. Volume trends downward, too, until the 
upward breakout. 


Statistics 983 


other technical patterns also set up resistance areas. Before investing in a pat- 
tern, always check for overhead resistance. 

The second cause of failure is when the general market swings against the 
breakout direction. If the breakout is upward and the market turns down, that 
may be enough to kill a profitable trade in your stock by blunting the advance 
and sucking the stock down along with the general market. 

A failure can also happen with stocks in the same industry. If competitor’s 
stocks are going down and yours is the lone holdout, chances are your stock 
will join the party and tank as well. Check the market and check stocks in the 
same industry before trading. 


Statistics 


Table 64.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. Over the decades, I catalogued 1,678 ascending trian- 
gles from 811 stocks with the first pattern found in July 1991 and the most 
recent in March 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some no 
longer trade. As the numbers show, most patterns have upward breakouts, and 
I don’t show bear market patterns, either. They were too few to include. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Triangles with upward 
breakouts act as continuation patterns 60% of the time and reversals the 
remainder. Downward breakouts show nearly the reverse with reversals out- 
numbering continuations. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Reversals and continuations show 
no performance difference after an upward breakout. Downward breakouts 
tend to drop farther if the triangle acts as a continuation of the downward 
price trend. 

Average rise or decline. The 43% rise is slightly above the 42.4% aver- 
age for all chart patterns. Downward breakouts fall well short of the 14.9% 
average drop for all chart pattern types. 


Table 64.2 

General Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 899 531 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 40% R, 60% C 61% R, 39% C 
Reversal, continuation performance 43% R, 43% C -11% R, -15% C 
Average rise or decline 43% -13% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 12% -2% 
Days to ultimate high or low 229 50 


How many change trend? 51% 23% 


984 Triangles, Ascending 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Compare the market numbers with the 
average rise or decline. When the market is bullish, it helps upward breakouts 
rise. Downward breakouts see a falling general market help price drop. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Upward breakouts take substantially 
longer to reach the ultimate high than downward breakouts take to reach the 
ultimate low. Let’s check the velocity of the two breakout directions: The drop 
is 40% faster than the rise. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how many patterns see 
price move more than 20%. When compared to other chart patterns, both 
up and down breakout numbers are below average. I think that’s a warning of 
underperformance. 

Table 64.3 shows failure rates for ascending triangles. Downward break- 
outs have higher failure rates than upward breakouts. Read the table as follows: 
17% of ascending triangles with upward breakouts in bull markets fail to see 
price climb more than 5% after the breakout. About half (49%) fail to rise 
more than 20%. 

Downward breakouts are far worse performers. More than half (55%) of 
the triangles will fail to see price drop more than 10%. I would not consider 
shorting a stock showing an ascending triangle with a downward breakout 
unless the situation was compelling (like someone held a gun to my head). 

Notice how the failure rates climb for small changes in the maximum 
price rise or decline. 

Table 64.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. Most ascending triangles will break out upward (see 
price ascend), hence the name. That’s backed up by the numbers in the table. 

Yearly position, performance. The best performing triangles have break- 
outs near the yearly high (upward breakouts) or low (downward breakouts). 


Table 64.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 153 or 17% 203 or 38% 
10 126 or 31% 87 or 55% 
15 85 or 40% 58 or 66% 
20 80 or 49% 61 or 77% 
25 51 or 55% 41 or 85% 
30 37 or 59% 31 or 91% 
35 42 or 64% 15 or 93% 
50 80 or 73% 27 or 98% 
75 85 or 82% 8 or 100% 


Over 75 160 or 100% 0 or 100% 


Table 64.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Up Breakout 


Statistics 


Down Breakout 


985 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


63% up 
L 36%, M 42%, 
H 46% 


37% down 
L-15%, M-14%, 
H -10% 


Median breakout distance to apex 64% 64% 
Throwbacks/pullbacks occurrence 64% 63% 
Average time to throwback/pullback peaks 6% in 6 days —4% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback/pullback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average rise/decline for patterns with 38% -11% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 
Average rise/decline for patterns without 51% -17% 
throwbacks/pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 69% 45% 
Performance with breakout day gap 41% -14% 
Performance without breakout day gap 43% -13% 
Average gap size $0.33 $0.49 


For upward breakouts, you gain a 28% advantage by trading a triangle within 
a third of the yearly high (versus near the yearly low). 

Downward breakouts provide evidence that you should short stocks mak- 
ing new lows rather than those making new highs. 

Apex distance. I compared the time to the breakout with the length of 
the triangle from the start to the apex. The median breakout distance is 64% 
of the way to the apex. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur almost 
two-thirds of the time and take 12 days for the stock to return to the breakout 
price. When a throwback or pullback happens, performance suffers and quite 
dramatically, too. 

After a throwback or pullback completes, the table shows that both 
upward and downward breakouts see price rise most often (69% for upward 
breakouts and 55% for downward ones). The 55% number isn’t a typo because 
45% of triangles continue lower and the rest move higher. 

Gaps. The performance difference for patterns with and without gaps 
isn’t large enough to twist our knickers. 

Table 64.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones for both breakout 
directions. For example, tall triangles in bull markets with upward breakouts 
show rises of 47%. Short ones rise just 39% on average. 


986 Triangles, Ascending 


Table 64.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 47% -16% 
Short pattern performance 39% -9% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 9.5% 9.4% 
Narrow pattern performance 43% -10% 
Wide pattern performance 43% -16% 
Median width 44 days 43 days 
Short and narrow performance 39% -9% 
Short and wide performance 40% -10% 
Tall and wide performance 45% -18% 
Tall and narrow performance 51% -13% 


‘To make use of this finding, compute the height of the triangle from the 
top trendline to the lowest low at the start of the triangle. Divide the height 
by the breakout price (the price where the stock crosses one of the trendlines). 
If the result is greater than the median shown in the table, then it’s a tall triangle. 

Width. Width is not as robust a predictor of performance as height. 
Wide patterns see better performance but only after a downward breakout. 
I used the median length as the separator between narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. Which combinations of height and 
width perform best? Anything tall outperforms anything short (on average), 
but see the table for the best results. You’ll want to avoid patterns that are both 
short and narrow. 

Table 64.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Linear regression of volume from the pattern’s start to its 
end says that volume trends downward the vast majority of the time. Remember 
you heard it here first. 


Table 64.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 80% down 78% down 
Rising volume trend performance 49% -11% 
Falling volume trend performance 42% -13% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 44% -13% 


Light breakout volume performance 41% -13% 


Statistics 987 


Rising/Falling volume. Upward breakouts with a rising volume trend 
see much better performance than those with falling volume. However, we’re 
talking about 20% of the samples with a rising volume trend (that’s 177 versus 
772). So this result could be because of a lack of samples. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume helps push price in tri- 
angles with upward breakouts to better performance. The push isn’t as signifi- 
cant as many imagine, but that’s because they probably haven’t studied volume 
like I have (nor offered proof for their beliefs). Another way of saying that is, 
aren’t statistics wonderful? There’s an old joke which goes, 90% of statistics 
are worthless. 

Table 64.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location, but it only 
applies to upward breakouts (because my computer gives misleading results 
for downward breakouts). I checked how often price returned to the triangle 
on the way to the ultimate high. 

If you were to set a stop-loss order at the top of the pattern, an upward 
breakout would trigger it 73% of the time. You might think that’s low, but 
remember that if price reaches the ultimate high as it prepares to throw back, 
then I stopped the search for price hitting the stop. 

Table 64.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. The worst performance happened in the 2010s 
for both breakout directions. The 1990s showed the best performance. Check 
the table for the exact numbers. 

Failures over time. Both breakout directions saw failures climb over 
the last 3 decades. Almost half (47%) of patterns with downward breakouts 
failed. By “failed,” I mean they failed to see price move more than 5% after 
the breakout. 

Table 64.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. If you like to trade busted patterns, then set 
your sights on downward breakouts. Almost half will bust. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted busted patterns by how many times they 
busted. Singles busts placed first for frequency. Upward breakouts saw double 
busts coming in second, but downward breakouts saw triple+ (two or more) 
busts placing second. I’ve seen that in other chart patterns, too, so no need to 
dial 9-1-1. 


Table 64.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Description Up Breakout 
Pattern top 73% 
Middle 24% 


Pattern bottom 4% 


988 Triangles, Ascending 


Table 64.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 47% -17% 

2000s 47% -11% 

2010s 35% -11% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 14% 19%* 

2000s 18% 44% 

2010s 21% 47% 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


Table 64.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 261 or 29% 242 or 46% 
Single bust count 130 or 50% 161 or 67% 
Double bust count 89 or 34% 12 or 5% 
Triple+ bust count 42 or 16% 69 or 29% 
Performance for all busted patterns -13% 36% 
Single busted performance -22% 51% 
Non-busted performance -13% 43% 


Busted and non-busted performance. I compared busted and non- 
busted patterns to see which performed best. Envelope, please. The winner 
is: single busted patterns! The problem with this finding is you have to pick a 
triangle that single busts (only). I haven’t found a way to sort out single busts 
for other busts. I'll leave that as an exercise for the reader. I will say that 67% 
of downward breakouts will single bust, so that’s a big trading edge. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 64.10 shows trading tactics. 

Now that you can identify ascending triangles and know their behavior, 
how do you trade them? Before I give an example of a trade, let’s discuss trad- 
ing tactics and the measure rule. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule sets a price target, so we can 
check the probability of price actually reaching the target. 


Trading Tactics 989 


Compute the height of the triangle from the top trendline to the lowest 
low near or at the start of the triangle. For upward breakouts, add the result 
to the price of the horizontal trendline. For downward breakouts, subtract the 
height from the breakout price to get the target. 

An example for upward breakouts makes the calculation clear. Consider 
the stock shown in Figure 64.5. Calculate the height of the triangle by sub- 
tracting the low (14.38 at the first minor low) from the high (17.63 denoted by 
the horizontal trendline) at the triangle’s start. The difference is 3.25. 

Add the result to the highest high—the value of the horizontal trendline— 
and you get a target price of 20.88. Price reaches the target in mid-July 1992, 
when it climbs to a high of 21.63, about 6 weeks after the upward breakout. 

A more visual approach is to draw a line from the start of the triangle 
(the top-left corner) parallel to the up-sloping trendline. The value of the line 
the day price breaks out of the triangle becomes the target price. The fig- 
ure shows the diagonal line. Be careful when determining where the triangle 
begins because tagging the start of the pattern too soon will cause an abnor- 
mally high price target. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches the tar- 
get. If you use the full height, as we did in the example, price will reach the 
target 70% of the time on average. You can use other heights (half, double) in 
the measure rule, and the table shows the success rate. 


Table 64.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the height of the chart pattern at the start of the triangle. 
Add the result to the price of the horizontal trendline (upward break- 
out) or subtract it from the breakout price (downward breakout). The 
result is the price target. The bottom portion of the table shows how 
often price reaches the target on average. 


Wait for breakout Buy (or sell short) the stock when price closes beyond the trendline. 


Support and Support and resistance may follow the trendline boundaries well into 
resistance the future. See Figures 64.6 and 64.7. 

Stop location See Table 64.7 for guidance on stop placement. 

Busted trade Downward breakouts that bust can lead to large gains. 

Apex Turning When price reaches the date of the apex, expect a minor high or low to 


appear. It might become a major turning point for the stock. 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching half height target 85% 67% 
Percentage reaching full height target 70% 44% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 51% 21% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 40% 10% 


990 Triangles, Ascending 


Arrow Electronics Inc (Electronics, NYSE, ARW) -24 


i 


Target Price Level 


i: 


Distance Between Dots 
Added to Top Dot 
Becomes Target Price 


rn LP ly 


| -19 


Premature 1 ' if | 
ae 
Pisa Hy 


Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 64.5 There are two ways to set a price target for an ascending triangle. 
Compute the triangle’s height by subtracting the low from the high at the start of 
the triangle (denoted by the two black dots). Add the result to the price marked 
by the top trendline. The result is the target. Alternatively, draw a line parallel to 
the up-sloping trendline beginning with the left top corner of the triangle. At the 
point where price breaks out of the triangle, the price level of the line becomes 
the target. 


Once you know the target, measure the distance, divide it by the current 
price expressed as a percentage, and compare it to the values in Table 64.3. 

Using the values from our example, the distance to the target measures 
3.25 and the breakout price (as our current price) of 17.63 gives 3.25/17.63 or 
18%. Let’s call it 20%. Table 64.3 says that in bull markets after upward break- 
outs, the stock will fail 49% of the time to see price climb more than 20%. 
So the chance of having a failed trade would be a bit less than 49% (probably 
closer to 45%). Flip it around (gently, don’t hurt it) and we find price should 
reach the target about 55% of the time on average. 

Wait for breakout. Thirty-seven percent of triangles break out down- 
ward, but the actual breakout direction is unknown ahead of time. If price 
closes above the top trendline or below the up-sloping trendline, that occur- 
rence signals a breakout. For the lowest risk of a failed trade, wait for the 
breakout before trading the stock. 

Support and resistance. If you consider the triangle as the momentary 
intersection of two trendlines, you can guess where support and resistance will 
be. It will be along the two trendlines, extended into the future. 

Figure 64.6 shows an example of this behavior on the weekly time scale. 
Notice the generally down-sloping volume trend from the triangle’s start to 
the week before the breakout. 


Trading Tactics 991 


Gillette Co (Toiletries/Cosmetics, NYSE, G) 


Figure 64.6 Ascending triangle on the weekly time scale. The price rise generally 
follows the up-sloping support line of the triangle. The numbers count the minor 
high and low touches of the trendline. 


Volume spikes upward on the breakout and then generally declines as 
price rounds over and approaches 1994. Price starts climbing again, essen- 
tially hugging the trendline started by the ascending triangle. The upward 
trend continues for several years following the triangle-initiated support line. 
Although the match between the sloping trendline and the slope of the later 
price action is not exact, the support is clear. 

Stop location. Use the information from Table 64.7 as guidance to 
help locate a stop-loss order. Once you have decided where to place a stop, 
change the potential loss into a percentage of the current price. If you start 
sweating, then consider moving the stop or abandoning the setup (trade) 
altogether. 

Busted trade. Downward breakouts that single bust can lead to a large 
gain. Consider trading busted downward breakouts for a big potential rise. 
Of course, if the triangle doesn’t single bust, then don’t trade it (that’s a varia- 
tion of a Will Rogers joke). 

Apex Turning. Look back at Figure 64.4. Draw a line from the apex of 
the triangle (that is, where the two trendlines join) directly downward until it 
intersects price. Notice how the stock turns there (it stops going down). 

I measured how often this works and wrote an article about it on my 
website (http://thepatternsite.com/Apex.html). I concluded, “Price reaches a 
minor high or minor low 75% of the time within a few days of the triangle 
apex. Price turns from down to up or up to down 60% of the time.” 

If you draw your triangle accurately enough, then you’ll know where 
price may turn by looking at the apex. 


992 Triangles, Ascending 


Experience 


I’ve traded ascending triangles 44 times and made money 55% of the time. 
I rarely trade them now because I don’t consider them a reliable chart pattern. 
Let me share with you a few lessons. 


Andrew Corp., Kenneth Cole Productions, and Park Electrochemical 


Andrew Corp. (ANDW), Kenneth Cole Productions (KCP), and Park Electro- 
chemical (PKE): In all of these stocks, I bought inside the ascending triangle, 
before the breakout. The stock broke out downward instead of the expected 
upward direction. I sold quickly and took a small loss in each of them. 


¢ Lesson: Wait for the breakout before buying. 


Proctor & Gamble 


In Proctor & Gamble (PG), in early 2007, I sold the stock on a downward 
breakout from an ascending triangle. The stock dropped a paltry 3.5% before 
recovering and making a new high, climbing 19% above my sale price. 


¢ Lesson: Before selling, try to determine how far down price is likely to 
drop. If it’s a lot, then sell. If not, consider riding out the decline. Only 
attempt this if the market and industry are both trending in a direction 
favorable to your trade (if you’re bullish and the market and industry 
are also bullish, it'll help). 


American Electric Power 


In American Electric Power (AEP), I bought on an upward breakout from an 
ascending triangle but “Upside is limited, though,” I wrote in my trading note- 
book. If the upside was limited, why did I want to buy the stock? 

The stock and industry showed terrific relative strength (relative to other 
stocks and other industries, mot Wilder RSI). I raised my stop once, and the 
stock snagged it when it busted the upward breakout. I took a 4% loss but that 
was a blessing. About 3 weeks after I sold, the bear market grabbed onto the 
stock and dragged it under by 46% below my sale price. 


Beazer Homes USA 


I faced the same situation with Beazer Homes USA (BZH). I sold a week after buy- 
ing in a bear market and took a loss when the upward breakout fizzled. I sold the 
stock at 50.30, and the stock bottomed at $1.25, a drop of 98% below where I sold. 


Experience 993 


Cisco Systems 


Cisco Systems (CSCO) was one of those trades where I felt I would lose money 
but traded it anyway. What happened? 

I lost money (just 3%)! 

In my trading notebook, I wrote, “I don’t think this trade will work out. 
I get the feeling that this will break out downward and tumble. Hopefully, my 
stop will not be hit if that’s the case.” 

The triangle broke out upward in late 2007, I bought in, and it wobbled 
up and down before taking me out on a one-day selloff when the Dow indus- 
trials dropped 365 points (which was big for that time). About two weeks after 
I sold, the stock started tumbling from 31.83 where I sold to a bear market low 
of 13.61 (57% lower). 


¢ Lesson: Keep your losses small before they become huge. 


Celadon Group 


In Celadon Group (CLDN changed to CGI) the reverse happened. I bought 
at the breakout, the stock dropped to the other side of the triangle, hitting my 
stop and taking me out of the trade. 

It double busted the upward breakout by dropping for a week before 
climbing 54% (in a bear market, too) above my sale price. I was right in calling 
the direction (buying the upward breakout) with a good upside potential, but I 
didn’t expect the stock to bust. My spreadsheet says I made a perfect entry and 
perfect exit on this trade. 


¢ Lesson: Sometimes trades go wrong. I traded the stock perfectly but 
lost money (trading well helps avoid creating bad habits). 


National Fuel Gas 


National Fuel Gas (NFG) made an ascending triangle less than 2 months 
after exiting the bear market in 2009. I bought a small position in the stock. 
Nice timing. 

The stock had trouble deciding on a direction. It moved up some, then 
reversed and dropped about the same amount as it had climbed. It didn’t hit 
my stop, but the stock recovered and resumed the uptrend. 

As it climbed, it made a measured move up chart pattern. That allowed 
me to set a price target at the top of the second leg. From my notebook: “The 
latest price tops the projection by 5 cents. Since today made a lower high, 
and quarterly [earnings] are coming, I expect bad news since other oil venues 
are suffering. Time to take the gain and exit. This has reached my 38-to-41 
target.” 


994 _ Triangles, Ascending 


I sold at 40.54 for a 24% profit. Two weeks later, the company surprised 
with better-than-expected earnings, and the stock went vertical for two days, 
then continued moving higher at about 30 degrees. 

I had a perfect entry and perfect exit according to my trading plan, but 
I left 34% additional profit unclaimed because I sold too early. Of course, if 
earnings had gone the other way, selling when I did would have been timely. 
I made the right choice. 


¢ Lesson: If you can time the market transition from bear to bull, you 
can make big gains. 


Pfizer 


With Pfizer (PFE) in 2005, the stock formed an ascending triangle. From my 
notebook: “This has moved beyond the breakout, but I consider it a good buy. 
This also pays a dividend, and I consider it a longer term holding. Keep the 
stop farther away to let this work higher.” 

Getting in late (5% above the breakout) meant bad news when the stock 
crested 2% above where I bought and eased lower. The stock hit my stop, and 
I took a 6% loss. The stock continued down another 25% below my buy price. 
I did collect one dividend payment, though. 


¢ Lesson: If you can’t buy in at the breakout price, then consider aban- 
doning the trade unless there’s a compelling reason to buy (like after a 
throwback completes or if you plan to hold for a long time). 


Lest these trades made you think I didn’t make much money trading 
ascending triangles, I bought Balchem Corp. (BCPC) using a buy stop above 
the breakout price. It triggered on the day of breakout in mid-2012, and I 
rode the stock upward for a 43% gain. In Headwaters (HW) I made 54%, 
Health Management Systems (HMSY) 34%, Textron (T) 44%, and 67% in 
XL Group. 


Sample Trade 


Dan is an investor with a few years of market experience. He is new to techni- 
cal analysis and discovered ascending triangles by accident. Fortunately, car 
insurance covered the damages. 

After doing some research to familiarize himself with the pattern, he 
found that if he delayed buying a stock until after a breakout, he would increase 
his chances of success. However, he would also give up part of his gains because 
the fastest portion of the rise occurs at the start. That was a trade-off he was 
willing to make. 


Sample Trade 995 


Dan took an interest in the company shown in Figure 64.7 when he 
noticed an ascending triangle forming in the stock. “I suspected that the 
breakout was coming when volume collapsed to 23,400 shares on 19 August. 
I was right.” 

Two days later, on higher volume, price crossed the triangle and peeked 
out the top. For the next few days, price balanced itself on the top horizon- 
tal trendline and waited for demand to send it higher. The decisive breakout 
occurred on 26 August, even though volume was tepid. 

“T grabbed my calculator and computed the breakout distance to the apex. 
It happened at the 70% mark. That signaled a potentially strong breakout. 
However, volume told a different story.” 

Although volume had been steadily receding throughout the triangle as 
one would expect, there was no enthusiastic volume on the breakout. “I decided 
to wait before buying.” 

Believing that a profitable opportunity was at hand, he computed the 
target price to see if it afforded a profitable move. The predicted price of 22.50 
was 15% above the 19.25 launch price. To Dan, the small move was not ter- 
ribly exciting, but it was much better than the interest rate banks were paying. 

Two days after the breakout, the stock started declining and returned to 
the top of the triangle. “That’s when I bought 500 shares at the high for the 
day, 19.50 [point 1]. I placed a stop-loss order 15 cents below the lowest low of 


Fastenal Company (Retail Building Supply, NASDAQ, FAST) 
- 23 


(i -22 


MM, i 
i uy fh thy M bey i | ul -20 
HO Seu 


Triangle 
Support Lines 


-19 


| 4! 
ry ‘ 
ap! | ial =i 
yur Wh ln Low Volume, Aug 19 my 


Jun 94 Jul Au Se Oct Nov Dec 
9g Pp 


Figure 64.7 Trading an ascending triangle. As described in the Sample Trade, 
Dan bought 500 shares of the stock at point 1 after the stock threw back to the 
triangle. He sold it at point 2, the day after the stock hit the price target of 22.50. 
Note the down-sloping volume trend during creation of the triangle and the two 
support lines parallel to the two triangle borders. 


996 Triangles, Ascending 


the triangle. That would limit my loss to a steep 15%, but it was also just below 
the nearest support level [the bottom of which was at 16.75]. I thought there 
was a decent chance that if the stock declined, growing demand would repulse 
price and not trigger my stop. Still, it was a concern.” 

Then he waited and watched. The stock peaked at 21.25 on 26 September 
before leveling off and heading back down. Since the stock was not near the 
price target of 22.50, Dan decided to hold on. The stock continued sinking 
until it found support at the horizontal triangle trendline at 19 on 5 October. 

The stock started moving up again. On Halloween, the stock reached his 
price target by hitting a daily high of 23. He decided to sell the stock the next 
day and received a fill at 22.50. 

Dan had a net gain of $1,450 or almost $3 a share. That is a 15% gain in 
2 months. He also decided that he was lucky when he sold near the top. 

When the stock returned to the support level in early October, it could 
have continued down. He decided that once a stock climbed by 10%, he should 
raise his sell stop to break even, even though in this case it would have cashed 
him out prematurely. 


65 


Triangles, Descending 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Triangle shape with horizontal bottom and down-sloping top. 


Upward Breakouts 


Reversal or continuation 


Performance rank 
Breakeven failure rate 
Average rise 

Volume trend 
‘Throwbacks 


Percentage meeting 
price target 


See also 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Intermediate-term bullish | Intermediate-term bullish 
continuation continuation 

33 out of 39 7 out of 20 

22% 22% 

38% 30% 

Downward Downward 

60% 64% 

64% 45% 


Head-and-shoulders tops, three falling peaks 


997 


998 Triangles, Descending 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Reversal or continuation 


Short-term bearish 


Short-term bearish 


reversal continuation 
Performance rank 15 out of 36 15 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 23% 13% 
Average drop 15% 21% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 58% 61% 
Percentage meeting 50% 45% 


price target 


The Results Snapshot shows the important statistical results for descending 
triangles. For the highest average rise, your best bet is to trade triangles with 
upward breakouts in bull markets. In bear markets, the descending triangle 
with an upward breakout does well, with a performance rank of seventh where 
a rank of 1 is the best. 

Bear markets with downward breakouts have the lowest failure rate rank 
(not shown, 14 out of 19 where 1 has the fewest failures). The failure rank is a 
count of how many descending triangles fail to see price move more than 5% 
after the breakout when compared to other chart patterns. 

Volume trends downward most often as the snapshot shows. Throwbacks 
and pullbacks happen less often than we see in other chart patterns (which is 
about 66%). The “percentage meeting price target” needs work, too. By cut- 
ting the height used in the measure rule, we can improve the target accuracy. 
We'll see how to do that in Trading Tactics section. 

Before then, though, let’s take a gander at this chart pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 65.1 shows a descending triangle that is typical in many respects. 
Price rises to meet a down-sloping trendline on the top of the pattern and 
falls back. It rebounds off a horizontal trendline along the base of the triangle. 
The volume pattern is unusual for a descending triangle. Normally, volume 
recedes as the breakout approaches, but this one appears to have a U-shaped 
trend—higher at the beginning and end and lower in the center. The breakout 
is downward and occurs on low volume. 

A bearish breakout can have high or low volume, but volume is usually 
heavy. After the breakout, price pulls back to the triangle boundary before 
continuing down. 


Tour 999 


Filene’s Basement Corp (Retail (Special Lines), NASDAQ, BSMT) 


yg Pullback - 
| ei7 


Lt 
it 0g - 6 


jut 

i Hy 
Low Volume 
Breakout - 3 


Sep 94 Oct Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar 


Figure 65.1 A nicely formed descending triangle with unusual volume pattern. 
Typically, volume trends downward and is quite low just before the breakout. Also 
shown is a pullback, repulsed by the horizontal resistance level. 


Why do descending triangles form? The descending triangle shown 
in the figure begins forming in October 1994 as part of a consolidation in a 
downward trend. Imagine you believe the fair value of this stock is 7.38 but 
is overvalued above that. You tell your broker to buy the stock should it fall 
to 7.38. After reaching a minor high at 8.38 on 11 October, the stock begins 
declining for a few days. It descends and reaches the buy price 2 days later. 
Your broker buys the stock. 

You are not alone. Other investors, believing the stock is retesting the 
low that occurred a week earlier, also buy the stock. Together, the buying puts 
a momentary floor on the stock. For the next 2 days, the stock returns to the 
7.38 level before buying demand pushes the price higher. This time the stock 
does not climb as high as the prior minor high; it only reaches a value of 8.13 
before turning down. 

Again, when the stock reaches a low of 7.38, buying demand increases 
enough to halt the decline at that level and to send the stock moving back up. 
During the next 2 weeks or so, you and other investors buy the stock. Enthu- 
siasm for the stock quickly wanes, and a series of lower highs outline a down- 
sloping trend. The floor, at 7.38, becomes the horizontal support level. 

Eventually, investors buy enough of the stock and have either run out 
of money to buy more or decide they already own enough. The stock slips 
below the support line on 9 November and closes at the low for the day at 
7.13. The stock hovers near that price for a few more days before continuing 
down in earnest on higher volume. 


1000 Triangles, Descending 


Quick-footed investors, realizing that the floor is no longer holding firm, 
sell the stock. The price begins declining rapidly now but soon levels off. For 
a few days, selling pressure meets buying demand and the decline halts, turns 
around, and begins moving up. It nears the base of the triangle; the smart 
money quickly disposes of any remaining shares in their portfolios. The pull- 
back completes, and the stock rounds over and starts heading down again. In 3 
months’ time the stock reaches the ultimate low of just under 3 before leveling 
out. That is a decline of 60%. 


Identification Guidelines 


Descending triangles have distinctive patterns, making them easy to identify. 
Consider the triangles shown in Figure 65.2. A descending triangle appears 
during March and April 1993 and marks the end of a long rise started in late 
1992. Like a ball bouncing along the floor, each bounce from the support line 
is lower than the previous bounce, giving the triangle a down-sloping appear- 
ance along the top. 

The support region at 29.50 is flat. These two ingredients, a down- 
sloping trendline on the top and a horizontal support line on the bottom, 
are the two main characteristics of descending triangles. A receding volume 
pattern throughout the formation completes the picture. 


Avon Products Inc (Toiletries/Cosmetics, NYSE, AVP) 


Apex 


‘hy | Mh . 
\ \f 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 65.2 The March triangle forms after a long climb beginning in late 1992. 
The nicely formed chart pattern has a receding volume trend, especially in the lat- 
ter half of the triangle. The July triangle is a failure because it does not immediately 
descend as expected. 


Identification Guidelines 1001 


The July pattern is also a descending triangle although not as well formed. 
Volume rises through the first half of the pattern before moving downward 
toward the triangle apex. 

If you owned stock in this company and sold during either of the descend- 
ing triangles, you would be pleased. Although the second pattern is a failure 
because price rises above the triangle top (after a downward breakout), price 
does start down within the month. Sometimes failed patterns prematurely 
alert you to a trend change, as the July example shows. 

Table 65.1 outlines the identification characteristics for descending 
triangles. 

Appearance. The triangular-shaped appearance makes the descending 
triangle pattern easy to identify. Look for two trendlines: The bottom one is 
horizontal, or nearly so, and the top one slopes downward. The two trendlines 
should eventually join at the triangle’s apex, but price usually breaks out before 
reaching it. 

Trendlines. The price trend is bounded by two trendlines: a down- 
sloping one along the peaks and a horizontal (or nearly so) one along the val- 
leys. Price must touch the trendlines at least five times, the top one at minor 
highs and the bottom one at minor lows. If price slices through a trendline at 
the start or end of the pattern, it does not count as a touch. 

The March triangle, for example, has only two trendline touches along 
the bottom and three along the top. 

Support and resistance appear along the two trendlines. Throwbacks to 
the top of the triangle usually stop at the sloping trendline, whereas pullbacks 
to the bottom halt at the horizontal trendline. After a downward breakout, 
price often follows the sloping trendline lower. 


Table 65.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance Price bounds a triangular-shaped pattern by two converging trendlines. 
The bottom one is horizontal, and the top one slopes downward so 
that they converge. 


Trendlines A horizontal (or nearly so) base acts to support price. A down-sloping 
price trend along the peaks forms overhead resistance. The trendlines 
converge at the apex. Price should touch the two trendlines at least 
five times at minor highs or lows (three touches of one trendline and 
two of the other). 


Crossing pattern Price should cross the triangle several times, covering the whitespace 
with price movement. 


Breakout A breakout occurs when price closes outside the trendline boundary, 
direction either upward or downward. 


Volume Volume recedes and tends to drop off just before the breakout. 


1002 ‘Triangles, Descending 


Crossing pattern. Price oscillates up and down within the triangle, with 
each wave getting smaller. Price should cross the pattern from top to bottom 
plenty of times to fill the whitespace. If you have a glob of whitespace in the 
middle of the pattern, then you’ve made a mistake. 

Breakout direction. Price can break out in any direction, including none 
at all when price just meanders out the triangle apex. The breakout direction 
is random, though, with a slight edge to upward breakouts 51% of the time. 

Volume. Volume typically recedes over the course of triangle develop- 
ment. As price approaches the breakout, it usually becomes quite low, as if 
gathering strength before a wrestling match, and then explodes upward during 
the breakout. 

Volume need not be high during the breakout or low preceding the 
breakout, but that is the typical behavior. Do not exclude a descending triangle 
just because volume looks unusual. 


Identification Challenges 


Triangles are easy to spot. However, there are some situations that dictate a 
careful approach. Figure 65.3 shows an example of what looks like a descend- 
ing triangle, but is not. The volume trend does not conform to the usual reced- 
ing pattern. In this example, volume rises along with price at the start of the 
triangle and then tapers off at the top when price rounds over. However, vol- 
ume climbs as price descends and then ignites the day after the breakout. 

Volume for many chart pattern types is not a crucial factor, and you should 
not attach too much significance to it. However, a volume pattern that is not 
characteristic raises a warning flag. Coupled with other factors, it might cause 
you to bypass the stock and look elsewhere for a more promising situation. 

The price picture is even worse. Well-formed descending triangles have 
price crossing from top to bottom several times. There is no massive amount 
of whitespace in the center of the triangle, but this one has it in abundance. 
Contrast Figure 65.3 with Figure 65.1. 

Don’t cut off a speedbump like that show and think it’s a descending tri- 
angle. It’s not. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 65.4 shows an example of what traders hate. The breakout is down- 
ward but lasts just 2 days before price gets sucked back into the mothership. 
Then, price takes to the air and climbs. When it rises above the top of the 
triangle, the descending triangle chart pattern becomes a failure (it busts the 
downward breakout in this case). 


Focus on Failures 1003 


Crompton and Knowles Co (Chemical (Specialty), NYSE, CNK) 
- 20 


My ily ing 2 


ly th ! - 
Ih heen 15 
(' “hy m ! | | 


| 
yl Th os 


Mar 95 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 65.3 This is not a descending triangle. There is too much whitespace 
in the center of the pattern. Price should cross from top to bottom several times 
forming at least two minor highs and lows. 


Checkpoint Systems (Precision Instrument, NYSE, CKP) 


7 - 20 
| - 19 
: Wy W 7 
Patterns Fails \h | \ | ye th HN - 17 
\ LD ip "| ae 
| ay a N el it" “ 

ih i mM \pf | 
Ae : 
~ Pullback - 13 
i Breakout “a 
-u 
- 10 


97 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan98 Feb Mar 


Figure 65.4 This is an example of a busted pattern. A brief downward breakout 
dooms this descending triangle. Underlying support and a bull market helped turn 
the price tide from down to up. 


1004 ‘Triangles, Descending 


The climb does not end there because price forms a pennant with an 
upward breakout. That pennant, being a half-staff pattern, suggests a climb 
that equals the one leading to it. In this example, the rise after the pennant is 
larger than the one preceding it. 

What went wrong with this triangle? The price trend leads downward 
into the pattern, and many traders would expect a downward breakout, but the 
triangle forms in the midst of a bull market. 

In a rising general market (that is, the S&P 500 index is moving up), a 
downward breakout is always a red flag. In fact, the S&P was on a straight 
uphill run leading into August and then the trend reversed. 

For about 2 weeks, price declined in the index and formed a bottom, then 
a higher bottom, and then a third higher low. The three rising valleys signaled 
a trend change from down to up, and the rising tide doomed the downward 
breakout from the triangle in the stock. 

Besides the market tide robbing the triangle ship of momentum, the tri- 
angle looks almost perfect. Price touches each trendline several times, crossing 
the triangle and overwriting the whitespace, but volume tends to rise instead 
of recede. 

The two minor lows near the start of the triangle do not rest on the hori- 
zontal trendline. If you were to connect those two lows with a new horizontal 
trendline, the breakout would have come a bit sooner, but you still would have 
lost money if you shorted the stock. 

In the summer of 1995 and into the fall (not shown), several peaks 
appeared near $13. Those peaks acted as support and played a role in stopping 
the decline. The underlying support coupled with a rising stock market trun- 
cated the decline and turned a handsome descending triangle into an ugly loser. 


Statistics 


Table 65.2 shows general statistics for descending triangles. 

Number found. I found 1,760 descending triangles in 831 stocks with 
the first appearing in July 1991 and the most recent in March 2019. Not all 
stocks covered the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. In three of four columns, 
the triangle acts as a continuation of the prevailing price trend. Only in bull 
markets after downward breakouts does the pattern act as a reversal most often. 

Reversal/continuation performance. As you scan across the columns, 
looking at the performance of reversals and continuations, be mindful to look 
at the number found. The large difference for upward breakouts in bear mar- 
kets (39% rise for reversals from 72 samples versus 23% for continuations 
using 85 samples) might be due to the comparatively low sample counts. 


Statistics 1005 


Table 65.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 737 157 650 216 
Reversal (R), 37% R, 63% C 46%R, 54% C 64% R, 34% C 47% R, 53% C 

continuation 

(C) occurrence 
Reversal, 38% R, 38% C 39%R, 23% C -15%R,-17% C -23% R, -20% C 

continuation 

performance 
Average rise 38% 30% -15% -21% 

or decline 
Standard & Poor's 9% 2% -2% -8% 

500 change 
Days to ultimate 167 91 48 30 

high or low 
How many 50% 38% 28% 48% 


change trend? 


Average rise or decline. Triangles in bull markets with upward break- 
outs are the stars, soaring 38% after the breakout. Notice how the bear market 
keeps the rise down to just 30%. 

Downward breakouts show bear markets taking price down further than 
bull markets (21% versus 15%). That makes intuitive sense. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The table shows the influence of the 
general market on the average rise or decline. In bull markets, the rising mar- 
ket tide helped lift all boats. In bear markets, the selling pressure tended to 
keep upward breakouts from rising far and encouraged downward breakouts 
to sink even further. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Upward breakouts take longer to reach 
the ultimate high than downward breakouts take to reach the ultimate low. 
I crunched the numbers several ways. The first was to compare the bu// market, 
upward versus downward breakouts. I found price drops 40% faster than it rises. 

The second was to compare the bear market ratios for up and down 
breakouts. Price drops 110% faster than it rises. 

The third was to compare bull and bear markets using the same breakout 
direction (both up or both down). The bear market sees price rise 40% faster 
than the bull market. Downward breakouts drop 120% faster in bear markets 
compared to bull markets. Isn’t this cool? 

What does this information mean? Be patient in bull markets for the 
largest gains. In bear markets, be ready to exit a trade quickly. 


1006 ‘Triangles, Descending 


How many change trend? This is a measure of how many triangles see 
price move more than 20% after a breakout. I like to see values of 50% or 
higher, but only upward breakouts in bull markets qualify. Of course, the other 
columns suffer because of the high benchmark. 

If you compare each column with the average for all other chart patterns, 
the numbers shown in the table either tie (bull market/down breakout) or fall 
short (the other three columns). 

Table 65.3 shows failure rates for descending triangles. How do you 
make sense of the numbers? Consider the 15% maximum price rise or decline 
row. Two columns show that more than half of the triangles (54%, 59%) will 
see price move no more than 15%. That is a huge failure rate. 

Notice how the failure rates skyrocket for small changes in the maximum 
price. For example, the right two columns show the breakeven failure rate 
doubling for the next row down. 

If you want to short a stock showing a descending triangle, do so only 
in bear markets. They have the fewest failures, at least initially. Trade upward 
breakouts from triangles in bull markets. 

With so many triangles failing so early in the trade, it must mean that a 
few triangles perform well. Thus, keep a close eye on your position over time. 
Chances are it will fail to meet your dreams. 

In Trading Tactics later in this chapter, ll discuss the measure rule. Sup- 
pose it says that a $40 stock stands a good chance of rising $10.50 in a bull 
market. That’s a 26% move. Is that realistic? The table shows that 55% of the 
time, price will fail to rise more than 25% (the closest entry to 26%). Thus, 
you'll have a losing trade more often than a winning one, all else being equal. 

Table 65.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 


Table 65.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum 
Price Rise or Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Decline (%) Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 163 or 22% 34 or 22% 151 or 23% 28 or 13% 
10 92 or 35% 28 or 39% 145 or 46% 33 or 28% 
15 59 or 43% 23 or 54% 85 or 59% 38 or 46% 
20 56 or 50% 12 or 62% 86 or 72% 14 or 52% 
25 34 or 55% 10 or 68% 58 or 81% 27 or 65% 
30 41 or 60% 8 or 73% 38 or 87% 16 or 72% 
35 28 or 64% 7 or 78% 26 or 91% 16 or 80% 
50 99 or 78% 13 or 86% 44 or 97% 30 or 94% 
75 54 or 85% 12 or 94% 15 or 100% 14 or 100% 


Over 75 111 or 100% £100r 100% 2 or 100% 0 or 100% 


Table 65.4 


Statistics 1007 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


Description 


Bear Market, 
Up Breakout 


Bull Market, 


Down Breakout 


Bear Market, 
Down Breakout 


Breakout direction 53% up 


Performance L 38%, 
of breakouts 
occurring near H 39% 


the 12-month 

low (L), middle 

(M), or high (H) 
Median breakout 61% 

distance to apex 


Throwbacks/ 60% 
pullbacks 
occurrence 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback ends 


Average rise/ 31% 
decline for 
patterns with 
throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 

Average rise/ 48% 
decline for pat- 
terns without 
throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 

Percentage price 60% 
resumes trend 


Performance 48% 
with breakout 


day gap 
Performance with- 36% 
out breakout 


day gap 
Average gap size $0.36 


* Fewer than 30 samples. 


M 36%, 


5% in 6 days 


12 days 


42% up 

L 37%, 
M 31%, 
H 21% 


57% 


64% 


6% in 5 days 


12 days 


25% 


39% 


52% 


42%* 


28% 


$0.51 


47% down 
L-18%, 
M -15%, 
H -13% 


65% 


58% 


-7% in 5 days 


13 days 


-13% 


-18% 


48% 


-16% 


-15% 


$0.38 


58% down 
L-20%, 
M -25%, 
H -20%* 


62% 


61% 


-9% in 5 days 


12 days 


-18% 


-27% 


47% 


-20% 


-22% 


$0.64 


Breakout direction. As one might expect, price breaks out upward more 
often in bull markets and downward more often in bear markets. 


1008 Triangles, Descending 


Yearly position, performance. There is no clear consensus of where 
the breakout should be for the best performance, but the lowest range wins in 
two columns. 

Apex distance. Price breaks out of the chart pattern between a median of 
57% and 65% of the way to the triangle’s apex. 

I compared the performance of breakouts before the median distance 
with those after the median. The bull market, upward breakout had the most 
samples, so I used those. Do you know what I found? There was absolutely no 
performance difference. Sigh. (Downward breakouts in bull markets favored 
breakouts closer to the apex with drops averaging 16% to 14%, so it wasn’t a 
complete waste of time.) 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. The table shows how often a throwback 
or pullback appears. On average it’ll take about a dozen days to complete the 
throwback or pullback. 

In all columns, when a throwback or pullback appears, performance suf- 
fers. For example, triangles in bull markets that throw back (not throw up) see 
price rise an average of 31%. Without a throwback, the rise averages 48%. 

Check for overhead resistance or underlying support before trading. If a 
congestion zone is nearby (maybe 5% to 10% away), then that could increase 
the chance of a throwback or pullback. 

After a throwback or pullback completes, price trends upward more often 
than not. Yes, you read that right. Even pullbacks see price rise between 52% 
and 53% of the time. Of course, that’s about random. 

Gaps. In three of four columns, a breakout day gap helps performance. 
Because I calculated performance from the breakout price (which was the 
opening price the day after a gap), you can still participate in the better perfor- 
mance by buying in quickly for those stocks showing a gap. 

Table 65.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Most of the time, tall patterns perform better than short ones. 
Upward breakouts in bear markets were the lone exception, but no one likes 
them anyway. 

‘To use this finding, measure the height of the triangle usually at the start 
of the pattern (where it’s tallest) and divide by the breakout price. If the result 
is greater than the median shown in the table, then you have a tall pattern. 

Width. Wide triangles perform better than narrow ones with one excep- 
tion: up breakouts in bear markets, the same column as for height. I used the 
median length as the separator between wide and narrow. 

Height and width combinations. When combining the characteristics 
of height and width the performance varies quite a bit. So check the table for 
your situation and give yourself a trading edge by trading patterns that show 
the best performance and avoid those with the worst performance. 

Table 65.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most of the time as the table 
shows, but does it make a performance difference you can use when trading? 


Statistics 1009 


Table 65.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern 46% 26% -19% -23% 
performance 
Short pattern 30% 34% -12% -20% 
performance 
Median height as 9.5% 16.8% 11.4% 17.4% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 34% 33% -15% -20% 
performance 
Wide pattern 42% 28% -16% -23% 
performance 
Median width 42 days 49 days 45 days 44 days 
Short and narrow 29% 39% -13% -20% 
performance 
Short and wide 33% 22% -12% -21% 
performance 
Tall and wide 45% 30% -18% -23% 
performance 
Tall and narrow 47% 18% -19% -22% 
performance 
Table 65.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 78% down 77% down 84% down 77% down 
Rising volume 37% 39% -13% -22% 
trend 
performance 
Falling volume 38% 28% -16% -21% 
trend 
performance 
Heavy breakout 40% 34% -17% -22% 
volume 
performance 
Light breakout 34% 24% -14% -21% 
volume 


performance 


1010 ‘Triangles, Descending 


Rising/Falling volume. Answer: Yes. Bull markets prefer a falling vol- 
ume trend, and bear markets prefer a rising trend. Keep in mind that bear mar- 
kets had fewer samples than bull markets (because bear markets were shorter 
in length and didn’t happen as often). 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume helps performance 
across the board. Finally! If you trade like I do, this finding won’t help you 
much. Why? Because I place a buy order a penny above the top trendline, 
so an upward breakout will trigger the order automatically. I won’t know the 
volume level until day’s end, and by then it’s too late. If you trade a throwback 
or pullback, then yes, breakout day volume may help you avoid setups likely to 
underperform. 

Table 65.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location, but only for 
downward breakouts. My computer doesn’t calculate stops for upward break- 
outs correctly. 

I checked how often price climbed during the decline to the ultimate low. 
The results in the table shows how far into the pattern price moved along the 
journey. The results help you gauge where to put the stop-loss order. 

For example, if you place a stop at the top of the pattern after a downward 
breakout in a bull market, price will trigger the stop 2% of the time. 

Once you decide on a stop location, change the potential loss into a per- 
centage of the current price. If it’s a large percentage, you might want to move 
the stop or abandon the trade. Of course, moving the stop closer to the current 
price increases the chance of it taking you out of a winning trade prematurely. 
So stop placement is an art. 

You might consider using a volatility stop. See the Glossary for details. 

Table 65.8 shows pattern performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. Upward breakouts show an alarming drop-off 
in performance (almost half from the 1990s). Downward breakouts haven’t 
really changed over time. 

Failures over time. Failures for upward breakouts have become steadily 
worse. Downward breakouts don’t show a consistent trend, but they are higher 
now than they were in the 1990s. 

Table 65.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. The busted count is relatively flat except for 
downward breakouts in bull markets, where it rises to 42%, above the 22% to 


Table 65.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Pattern top 2% 0% 
Middle 14% 12% 


Pattern bottom 67% 67% 


Statistics 1011 


Table 65.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 


Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 51% -16% 
2000s 37% -14% 
2010s 27% -16% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 14% 19% 
2000s 23% 30% 
2010s 28% 24% 
Table 65.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns 203 or 28% 36 or 23% 276 or 42% 48 or 22% 

count 
Single bust count 91 or 45% 27 or 75% 196 or 71% 35 or 73% 
Double bust count 66 or 33% 5 or 14% 13 or 5% 0 or 0% 
Triple+ bust count 46 or 23% 4or11% 67 or 24% 13 or 27% 
Performance for all -14% -20% 40% 26% 

busted patterns 
Single busted -26% -25% 54% 33% 

performance 
Non-busted -15% -21% 38% 30% 

performance 


28% for the other three columns. If you think that the column represents a 
countertrend move (a downward breakout when the market is climbing), then 
you have to wonder why the bear market, upward breakout column only sees 
23% of triangles bust. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the busted patterns into how often they 
busted (single, double, or more than twice). Single busts happen most often, 
as one would expect. The second-place finish depends on the column, though. 

Busted and non-busted performance. The bottom three rows in the 
table are my attempt to show how well busted patterns compare to the perfor- 
mance of their non-busted siblings. 

If you can tell that a pattern will single bust, then it’ll outperform the 
other two rows on average. You might give busted downward breakouts in bull 
markets a try. If the stock single busts (71% do), the average rise is 54%. 


1012 ‘Triangles, Descending 


Trading Tactics 


Table 65.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule provides a price target to shoot 
for. It won’t guarantee that you'll hit it. To use it, compute the height of the 
triangle by subtracting the price of the lower trendline from the highest high 
in the triangle. Then, subtract the height from the value of the lower horizon- 
tal trendline (downward breakouts) or add it to the breakout price (upward 
breakout). The result is the target price. 

For example, compute the height of the triangle shown in Figure 65.5 by 
taking the difference between the highest high and lowest low (marked by the 


Table 65.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Calculate the height of the triangle by subtracting the highest high 
from the lowest low. For downward breakouts, subtract the height 
from the value of the lower trendline. For upward breakouts, add the 
height to the price where it pierces the top trendline. Alternatively, 
draw a line parallel with the down-sloping trendline starting at the 
lower-left corner of the triangle. The value of this line the day price 
breaks out of the triangle becomes the downward breakout target 
price. The bottom portion of the table shows how often the measure 


rule works. 
Wait Since the breakout direction is unknown, always wait for the breakout 
for breakout to occur. After a downward breakout, sell short immediately or after 


price pulls back to the triangle base and starts moving down again. 
Another way to play the triangle is to wait for an upward breakout, 
then buy the stock. 


Cover For short-term traders, cover your short positions when price 
on support finds support. 


Stop location See Table 65.7 for guidance. 
Busted trade Trade downward breakouts in bull markets that (single) bust. 


Apex Turning | When price reaches the date of the apex, expect a minor high or low to 
appear. It might become a major turning point for the stock. 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching 77% 63% 74% 72% 

half height target 
Percentage reaching 64% 45% 50% 45% 

full height target 
Percentage reaching 47% 25% 24% 20% 

2x height 
Percentage reaching 36% 15% 11% 12% 


3x height 


Trading Tactics 1013 


Kulicke and Soffa (Semiconductor Cap Equip., NASDAQ, KLIC) 


| wy 
\.! hy 


al 


Predicted ——— 


. | | 
Price Target ilar I 


93 Dec Jan 94 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 65.5 The measure rule: Take the difference between the two trendlines 
at the triangle’s start (denoted by the black dots) and subtract the result from the 
value of the lower trendline, or draw a line parallel to the down-sloping trendline 
beginning at the lower-left corner. The value of the line on the day when price 
breaks out downward becomes the target price. 


black dots). The value is 1.44 (that is, 8.82 — 7.38). Subtract the height from the 
value of the horizontal trendline, or 7.38 — 1.44, giving a target of 5.94. Price 
reaches the target the day of the breakout. 

An alternative approach, which eliminates the cumbersome math, is to 
draw a line parallel to the down-sloping trendline starting at the lower-left 
corner of the triangle (like that shown). The value of the line on the date where 
price breaks out of the triangle becomes the target price. 

The lower portion of the table shows how often the calculated measure 
rule works. For our example, we’re seeing the pattern in a bull market with a 
downward breakout using the full height. The table says price will reach the 
target 50% of the time. If you were to cut the height in half and subtract it 
from the breakout price, then the success rate climbs to 74%. 

The discussion of Table 65.3 gives an example of how you can change the 
distance to the target into a percentage of the current price. Then use the table 
to discover how often price will fail to move that far. 

Wait for breakout. Waiting for a breakout to occur is paramount since 
the breakout direction is unknown ahead of time. If you do not wait for a 
downward breakout before shorting the stock, price could quickly rise away 
from you in an upward breakout. However, shorting a stock is not for the faint 
of heart and entails substantial risk. If you miss the initial breakout, you can 
always short after a pullback (be careful: Table 65.4 says price continues falling 
less than half the time). 


1014 Triangles, Descending 


A pullback is also a good time to add to your short position. Wait for price 
to resume falling before shorting. Cover your position when price approaches 
the target or if the picture changes (either fundamentally or technically). 

Cover on support. If you have shorted the stock, then cover the short 
when the stock finds support. From 58% to 61% of the time, price will reverse 
at the bottom of a pullback (about a median decline of 5% below the breakout 
in bull markets), so expect a turn there in about (median) 4 days. 

If you ride out the pullback or if the stock doesn’t have a pullback, cover 
when the stock finds support. Be quick, because downward turns are often 
V-shaped, so you won’t have much time. 

If you are long the stock and are an intermediate- or long-term holder 
and you do not want to suffer through the average decline (see Table 65.2) 
after a downward breakout, consider selling as it breaks out downward (have a 
sell order in place a penny below the bottom trendline or sell on the close on 
the breakout day). 

Stop location. Table 65.7 shows how often price will reach various loca- 
tions in the triangle. Use that as guidance for placing a stop-loss order. 

Busted trade. Downward breakouts that single bust in bull markets 
present an opportunity to profit from the trend reversal. Price breaks out 
downward, drops less than 10%, and reverses. Have a buy stop a penny or two 
ready at the top of the triangle. If price rises, it’ll trip the stock and you'll be 
on your way. 

Look for overhead resistance to an upward move within 10% of the chart 
pattern. If you find some, then the stock might double bust. You’re looking to 
trade single busts only. 

Apex Turning. Look back at Figure 65.1. Notice that the pullback peaks 
at the triangle’s apex (within a day, anyway). Figure 65.2 shows another exam- 
ple where price forms a minor high or low near the day the two trendlines 
converge at the triangle’s apex. 

I measured how often this works and wrote an article about it on my 
website (http://thepatternsite.com/Apex.html). I concluded, “Price reaches a 
minor high or minor low 75% of the time within a few days of the triangle 
apex. Price turns from down to up or up to down 60% of the time.” 

If you draw your triangle accurately enough, then you'll know where 
price may turn by looking at the apex. 


Experience 


I have used the descending triangle for both buying and selling. Let’s talk 
about the sell side first. 


Experience 1015 


Johnson & Johnson 


Johnson & Johnson (JNJ) made a tall downward spike during the bear mar- 
ket in October 2008. I bought that day and received a fill at 55.12. Two days 
later, the stock had rebounded to 67.48, but I was in the trade for the long 
term. I missed an opportunity to cash out for a 22% gain. Realistically the gain 
would have been 16% if I sold at the next day’s open. 


¢ Lesson: If the market hands you a large short-term gain, consider 
taking it. 


The stock dropped and formed what now looks like a symmetrical trian- 
gle, but I thought was a descending triangle at the time. You can see it either 
way, depending on how you draw the trendlines and how many times you 
expect price to touch the trendlines (I now require five touches). 

The stock continued lower, and I sold the day price broke out downward 
from the triangle, receiving a fill at 54.97. So I bought at 55.12, sold at 54.97, 
and made money. How can that be? The stock paid a dividend, so I made 
enough to overcome the loss. From my notebook: “This looked to be falling 
through a descending triangle, so I know it’s going lower.” The stock bottomed 
at 46.25 or 15% below where I sold. 


¢ Lesson: Sell on adverse breakout from a descending triangle. 


Southwest Airlines 


Another trade is something I hate to see. Price breaks out downward from a 
triangle in a stock I own, I sell my position, and the stock reverses, busting the 
downward breakout. In the fall and winter of 1999 and early 2000, I bought 
Southwest Airlines three times for various reasons and held them all. 

Price started climbing in February and leveled off in April where it flew 
sideways. That’s when the airline stock made a descending triangle. Here’s 
what I wrote in my notebook: “27 June 2000. I sold my entire holdings because 
the stock has pierced the support base of a descending triangle. With seasonal 
performance moving up in December and peaking in the spring [the stock hit 
a high in May at 15.17], I missed the high by about $3/share. Ouch. Oil prices 
are high, raising fuel costs, and interest rates are still high, maybe moving up 
more. So, it looks like the excitement is over although today the stock is up 
almost $1.” 

The day before I sold, the stock closed below the descending triangle. 
So I sold the next day, and it filled at 13.04, a few pennies above the closing 
price and comfortably back inside the triangle. 


1016 ‘Triangles, Descending 


Price left the runway and soared into 2001. I missed out on an opportu- 
nity to make an additional 79%. However, I pocketed 25%, 27%, and 30% on 
the three trades. 


¢ Lesson: I sold the day after an adverse breakout, but failed to deter- 
mine how far price might fall. Based on seasonality and other factors, 
I sold correctly. This was a long-side trade held during a bear market 
in a stock that happened to continue to do well. 


R.G. Barry 


In R.G. Barry (RGB) I bought the stock based on fundamentals and a promis- 
ing technology they had developed, but when a descending triangle appeared, 
Isold after the downward breakout. I took a loss, but the stock continued lower 
19% below my sale price. 


¢ Lesson: If a stock does not do what you expect, consider selling, espe- 
cially after an adverse breakout from a chart pattern. 


Building Materials Holding Corp. 


On the buy side, I bought an upward breakout in a descending triangle in 
Building Materials Holding Corp. (BLG) and sold after price spiked upward 
20% after the announcement of quarterly earnings. The stock retraced for a 
week, then started moving higher. I made 22% but missed out on the 52% rise 
above my sale price after I sold. 


¢ Lesson: Many times after a good earnings announcement, price will 
complete an inverted dead-cat bounce (price spikes up for a day or 
two and then retraces for a week to 10 days but sometimes up to a 
month) and then climb thereafter. Nimble traders can wait for price to 
retrace and then buy, participating in the stock as it rises on a positive 
future outlook. 


ExpressJet Holdings 


In ExpressJet Holdings (XJT), I bought an upward breakout from a descend- 
ing triangle in early 2007 and kept a tight stop. I lost 5% when the stock eased 
lower. I’m glad I sold because the stock dropped from my 5.78 sale price to 
34 cents (and perhaps lower before I archived the data), a decline of 94%. 


¢ Lesson: Keep losses small. 


Sample Trade 1017 


Frontier Oil Corp. 


In late 2010, I traded a descending triangle in Frontier Oil Corp. (FTO) with a 
busted downward breakout. The stock dropped 5% after the breakout, turned 
around, and I bought when it recovered to near the top of the triangle, in 
November at 15.47. The stock moved up at a quick pace, and I was stopped out 
after it peaked, at 25.35 for a 64% gain in 3 months. 


¢ Lesson: Busted downward breakouts can lead to good gains. 


Sample Trade 


Jacob is a novice investor. He has an MBA and works in the insurance industry, 
which has acclimated him to risk. Still, shorting a stock is not his first choice. 
The stock shown in Figure 65.6 interested him. 

A few days before the breakout, he ran through the qualifiers. The volume 
trend looked good: generally downward as you would expect until a few weeks 
before the breakout when it deviated from the normal pattern. The number 
of touches from side to side was good, and the minor highs and lows were 
distinct. He concluded that this was a valid descending triangle in the making. 


Magnetek, Inc (Electrical Equipment, NYSE, MAG) 
; - 25 


ee 
ye 
f sft a” 


Stock Sold 
-21 


Hl a 


May 92 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb Mar 


Figure 65.6 As described in the Sample Trade, instead of opening a short posi- 
tion, Jacob bought into the stock after the descending triangle reached the meas- 
ure rule target. He raised his stop as price climbed and was eventually stopped out 
at 23 for a profit. A measured move up chart pattern helped him gauge the rise. 


1018 ‘Triangles, Descending 


“I was nervous about shorting the stock because it could turn around 
and climb away from me,” but a stop placed at the top of the triangle would 
limit his risk if things did not work out (unless it gapped higher). Still, he was 
uncomfortable shorting. Instead he wanted to own the stock at a lower price. 
“T decided to buy the stock [instead of shorting it] after it reached the measure 
rule target.” 

He computed the height of the triangle and discovered that if price 
dropped to the target, it would bottom at 12.50. 

Jacob watched the stock each day. He saw it break out downward and 
begin declining. The first time it reached the target price and recovered a bit, 
he suspected the stock was near its low. At least, that is what he hoped. 

On 19 October 1992, “I bought 200 shares at the close of 12.50, at exactly 
the target price I predicted.” He placed a stop-loss order at 11.13, slightly 
below the prior December’s low of 11.25, a support level. Then, he looked at 
the possible reward and believed the stock would rise to its old high of 17. 

He sat back and waited. It didn’t take long for the stock to bottom out 
and start its climb. 

In mid-November, Jacob hoped the trend was the beginning of a meas- 
ured move up. He calculated the difference from the low near where he bought 
the stock to the most recent high and came up with a value of 2.63. He added 
this to the current closing price and computed a new target price of 17.50. 
This number was quite close to his original price target of 17. 

Over the next few days, the stock started moving up again. 

By early December it had hit his new price target and the measured move 
was complete. Jacob decided to raise his stop-loss point to 16, the top of a sup- 
port layer. If the stock sold at 16, he would have a gain of 28%, a respectable 
return. The results pleased him so far, but he worried that price would hit his 
stop as the stock consolidated. 

Just after the New Year the stock started climbing again and he held on 
for the ride. He kept raising his stop until he was taken out at 23, to which 
the stock declined in mid-February 1993. After expenses, this trade made him 
nearly $2,000, substantially more than his initial estimate. 


66 


Triangles, Symmetrical 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price forms lower highs and higher lows following two converging trend- 
lines; the top one slopes downward and the bottom one slopes upward. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Intermediate-term bull- Short-term bullish 
ish continuation reversal 
Performance rank 36 out of 39 13 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 25% 23% 
Average rise 34% 26% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Throwbacks 62% 65% 
Percentage meeting price target 58% 36% 
Synonym Coil 
See also Diamond bottoms; diamond tops; head-and- 


shoulders bottoms; head-and-shoulders tops; 
triangles, ascending; triangles, descending 


1019 


1020 ‘Triangles, Symmetrical 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Reversal or continuation 


Short-term bearish 


Short-term bearish 


reversal continuation 
Performance rank 34 out of 36 17 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 37% 19% 
Average drop 12% 19% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 65% 67% 
Percentage meeting price target 36% 39% 


The Results Snapshot shows the performance for symmetrical triangles under 
varying market conditions and breakout directions. Performance is, well, awful. 
Performance ranks near the bottom of the list of chart patterns. Failures (not 
shown, but they are worse) rank near the bottom of the list, too. 

Volume trends downward most of the time. Throwbacks and pullbacks 
appear as often in symmetrical triangles as they do in many other chart patterns 
(about 66% of the time). The percentage meeting the price target matches the 
average rise or decline, meaning it’s awful, too. You can boost the success rate 
by cutting the pattern’s height in half and using that. Pll explain that in Trad- 
ing ‘Tactics. 

Is there nothing good I can write about symmetrical triangles? Yes! They 
are as plentiful as people not wearing masks during the Covid-19 pandemic. 
Not the rousing endorsement you expected, is it? Let’s take a look at this pat- 
tern, and maybe we can learn what to avoid. 


Tour 


Figure 66.1 shows an example of a symmetrical triangle. Price rises to the 
start of the triangle and makes a new high. Then price crosses the pattern from 
top to bottom, making lower highs and higher lows. After nearly 2 months, the 
trends are in place. A down-sloping trendline drawn along the tops connects 
the minor highs, whereas an up-sloping trendline on the bottom supports the 
minor lows. 

Volume recedes although it is spiky in places. Price attempts to leave the 
triangle in late June but gets sucked back in. It tries again and, with higher vol- 
ume, shoots out the top of the triangle but quickly throws back, curls around, 
and heads lower. 

Why do symmetrical triangles form? Price zooms up, making higher 
highs on succeeding days. Eventually, selling pressure quenches demand for 


Tour 1021 


Kaufman and Broad (Homebuilding, NYSE, KBH) 


Breakout — 16 


Apr 95 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 66.1 A symmetrical triangle with a small price rise. 


the stock and price turns down. Swing traders, sensing a change in trend, 
quickly sell their holdings, putting additional pressure on the stock. Price falls 
to a level where prior support set up by a peak months earlier or various other 
factors entices investors to view the stock as a bargain. The price is shooting 
up, they reason, so why not join the trend, especially now that it is cheaper? 

Such rationalizations increase demand and send the stock up again, but 
this time the momentum players who missed a chance to sell earlier do so now. 
Others, believing that there may not be enough upward momentum to carry 
the stock to the old high, sell, too. The selling pressure halts the price rise at a 
lower level and turns it around. 

Value investors see the stock drop, and since the fundamentals have not 
changed, buy it on the way down. Some add to their positions at a lower price, 
and others buy it for the first time. The buying may force price to move hori- 
zontally for a bit instead of straight down. Eventually, though, a higher low 
forms not so much from anxious buyers as from a dearth of sellers. 

Throughout the trend, volume is decreasing. Fewer and fewer shares change 
hands, and it becomes easier for the stock to change direction. Eventually, though, 
a large buy order comes in and price rises. When the stock pierces the top trend- 
line, it takes out the orders that investors have placed to buy when price rises above 
the trendline. This additional buying cascades and price soars on heavy volume. 

If demand is strong enough, price continues rising. About half the time, 
though, price spins around and heads back to the triangle boundary—a throw- 
back. There price meets support at the top trendline or at the level of the 
triangle apex. Usually, price rebounds and continues in its original direction. 
Sometimes, though, price continues down, signaling an end to the upward 
trend (such as that shown in the figure). 


1022 ‘Triangles, Symmetrical 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 66.1 lists identification guidelines for symmetrical triangles. 

Appearance. Consider Figure 66.2, a symmetrical triangle with an 
upward breakout. The overall shape of the chart pattern is triangular and 
defined by two trendlines: One slopes downward from the top and the other 
slopes upward from the bottom so that they join at the apex. Price crosses the 
pattern plenty of times. 

Touches. Numbers mark the minor highs and lows, which touch or 
come close to each trendline for a total of at least five touches (seven in this 
case). You must have at least five trendline touches, three on one trendline and 
two on the other, but they need not alternate. Anything less than five touches 
risks calling a bogus pattern a symmetrical triangle. 

Whitespace. Price must cross the triangle from top to bottom, covering 
any whitespace. Too much whitespace is a common flaw for novice pattern 
hunters seeking triangles. 

Volume. Volume trends downward from the start of the pattern to the 
end. Turnover may increase when price rises and declines when price falls, but 
the overall trend is receding. Let me say it is unusual for a symmetrical triangle 
to not have a receding volume trend, but it happens. 

Even when volume tapers off, it may not be noticeable unless you run lin- 
ear regression and look at the slope of the resulting line. However, more than 
80% of the triangles do show a receding volume trend, high enough to make 
you consider any deviations carefully. 


Table 66.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A triangular shape forms within the confines of two trendlines; the bot- 
tom one slopes up and the top one slopes down so that they intersect 
at the triangle apex. The trendlines need not be the same length. 


Touches There should be at least five distinct touches of the two trendlines 
(total), three on one trendline and two on the other, at minor highs 
and minor lows. Price slicing through the trendline at the start or end 
of the pattern doesn’t count as a touch. 


Whitespace Price should cross the pattern from top to bottom, covering much of 
the whitespace. 


Volume Usually recedes throughout the triangle but can be irregular and is often 
very low just before the breakout. Don’t discard a pattern because it 
has an irregular volume trend. 


Breakout Unknown ahead of time. Occurs when price closes outside the trend- 
direction line boundary. 
Duration Typically longer than 3 weeks at a minimum. Patterns 3 weeks or less 


are pennants providing they sit atop a flagpole. 


Identification Guidelines 1023 


Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing (Chemical (Diversified), NYSE, MMM) Ps 


_——— Breakout — 39 


- 58 


-57 


- 56 


lt | 
i Mal 
| 


Ml, 55 
| i i} 

| | HW \ hy wh 54 
| yi Loo 
i if > 
mH il, 


Jan 93 Feb Mar Apr Ma Jun Jul Aug Se Oct 
p' y p 


Figure 66.2 A symmetrical triangle with an upward breakout. Price closes out- 
side the triangle but returns before the apex. In this instance, price not only 
returned but shot out the other side. Numbers mark the various trendline touches. 
A dead-cat bounce sees price tumble $5 in 1 day, then bounce up, and eventually 
move lower. 


Breakout direction. The breakout can be in any direction, includ- 
ing meandering horizontally, but it often follows the prevailing price trend 
(upward breakout in an upward trend or downward breakout in a downward 
trend). However, it’s near random. Don’t try to guess the breakout direction. 
You might hurt yourself. 

Duration. Symmetrical triangles can be any length, but the minimum 
length is 3 weeks. Anything shorter than 3 weeks and it could be a pennant. 
A pennant, however, is only valid if it rests on a flagpole, so if you have a 
2-week pattern without a pole, then it’s a symmetrical triangle. 

Figure 66.3 shows two patterns. The one on the left is not a valid sym- 
metrical triangle. 

Why? 

It forms beginning from the minor low at point A and rises to the 
minor high at point B. Then price declines following the top trendline and 
reaches the minor low at point C. Notice that there is only one minor high 
(point B) and two minor lows (A and C), but the second minor low, point 
C, is not included in the triangle trendline boundary. Not only are there 
missing minor highs and lows, but the bottom trendline is drawn incor- 
rectly as well. 

The whitespace in the center of the triangle is often a clue to an improp- 
erly identified triangle. Price should cross the triangle and fill the space, but it 
doesn’t in this case. 


1024 Triangles, Symmetrical 


Gleason Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, GLE) 


Not a Valid Symmetrical Triangle 


Valid Symmetrical Pr i | | 
Triangle pu lj | 


il i lal _33 


Downward 
Breakout 


Jul 95 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar 


Figure 66.3 Two symmetrical triangles, one valid, the other invalid. The trian- 
gle on the right shows a downward breakout which busts. The pattern on the 
left is bogus. 


The pattern on the right is a valid symmetrical triangle. It has plenty of 
minor highs and lows that touch the two trendlines. Price crosses the pattern 
from top to bottom enough times that it fills the whitespace. Notice the differ- 
ence between the right pattern and the left one. 

Just before the triangle’s apex, price dips outside the trendline boundary, 
pulls back, and moves sharply higher. 

When price moves no more than 10% away from the triangle, and then 
reverses to close either above the top of the pattern or below the bottom of 
it, it busts the breakout. The move in the new breakout direction can be quite 
large. Unfortunately, the symmetrical triangle is one of the few patterns where 
double and triple busts are quite high. [ll discuss this in Table 66.9. 

The volume trend is predominantly downward in the triangle. Volume is 
60,100 shares at the start of the right triangle but recedes until the day before 
the breakout, when only 4,600 shares trade. That’s quite a decline. 

Before you pronounce a chart pattern to be a symmetrical triangle, look 
to the left of the pattern. Is there a minor high that mirrors the one on the 
right? If so, then you might be looking at a (complex?) head-and-shoulders 
top. 

A mirror image of the symmetrical triangle, one that is back-to-back 
with the one you have selected, probably represents a diamond top or bottom. 
When one of the trendlines in the triangle is horizontal (or nearly so), then the 
pattern is an ascending or descending triangle. All of these other chart patterns 
are ones that you need to search for. Many are more powerful than symmetri- 
cal triangles and give better performance. 


Focus on Failures 1025 


Focus on Failures 


Symmetrical triangles have two types of failures. The first is one of identifica- 
tion, and Figure 66.4 shows an example. 

I cannot stress how important it is to have at /east five trendline touches. 
Many times a rounding bottom may tempt you to create a symmetrical trian- 
gle out of it. The price action seems to narrow over time, but there is really 
only one minor high. The figure shows a good example of a bad pick. 

The bogus triangle begins with the minor high at point A, and price 
drops rapidly to the minor low at point B. Then price meanders up following 
the lower trendline before crossing to point C. 

Price does not cross the pattern enough to qualify this as a valid sym- 
metrical triangle, meaning there’s too much whitespace. This pattern doesn’t 
look like the one shown in Figure 66.2. 

Figure 66.5 shows two more patterns. Let’s discuss the left one, the 
February—March pattern. 

The triangle has two minor highs and three minor lows, all of them 
touching (or coming close to) their respective trendlines. Price crosses the 
pattern from top to bottom enough to fill the whitespace. 

The two trendlines intersect and the triangle stands alone. By that, I 
mean it is not part of another pattern. Or is it? The left peak (the first peak in 
January) in conjunction with the first minor high in the triangle might mark 
the beginning of a double top (or, if you include the second, lower, peak in 
January, it might be a triple top). Since price does not fall below the lowest low 


Tesoro Petroleum (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, TSO) 


af 
it jl hy Too Much Whitespace -11 
Mb ati 


‘ty Ml W 
4 hoe fut _. 
' h [yh hn 


May 95 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 66.4 An invalid symmetrical triangle. Price does not cross the pattern 
enough times to fill the triangle, leaving whitespace predominating. 


1026 Triangles, Symmetrical 


Zurn Industries (Building Materials, NYSE, ZRN) 


Triple Top 


Double Top 5% Failure 


Double and Triple 
Top Confirmation Line 


Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 66.5 The symmetrical triangle on the left has an upward breakout that 
fails to rise by more than 5%. The triangle is a 5% failure. The triangle is part of 
a double or triple top. The pattern on the right does not have enough trendline 
touches to be valid. 


between the two peaks (in early February, at the bottom start of the triangle) 
before reaching a higher high (in March), the pattern does not confirm and is 
not a double (or triple) top. 

However, the higher high forming as part of the throwback to the triangle 
apex (late March) could form a larger triple top (the early January high, trian- 
gle high, and March peak). Once price tumbles below the low formed between 
the three peaks, a triple top is confirmed and price heads down, pulling back 
briefly (twice) to just above the formation low before continuing down. 

The February/March triangle zs a valid symmetrical triangle, even though 
a triple top develops around it. 

The triple top (overhead resistance, really) explains why this triangle fails. 
The triangle breaking out upward instead of downward in this situation is sus- 
picious because of the overhead resistance set up by the prior peaks. 

This symmetrical triangle is what I call a 5% failure. Price moves no 
more than 5% away from the breakout price before trending in a new direc- 
tion (downward in this case). When price closes below the bottom of the trian- 
gle, it busts the upward breakout, too. 

Look at the right pattern. Is it a valid symmetrical triangle? Price crosses 
the pattern from top to bottom a few times. Volume recedes as one would 
expect. However, there are only four trendline touches, not five. When 
price pierces the lower trendline, it’s not a minor low touch that’s inside the 


Statistics 1027 


trendline (we’d have to redraw the trendline to include the minor low, and that 
would invalidate the triangle, too). The April pattern is not a valid symmetri- 
cal triangle. 


Statistics 


This just in: Table 66.2 shows general statistics for symmetrical triangles. 
It’s true! 

Number found. I located 4,085 triangles in 1,011 stocks with the first in 
May 1988 and the most recent in April 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire 
period, and some no longer trade. Most of the patterns appear in bull markets, 
but that’s only because they are longer (and more of them) than bear markets. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. The trend columns (bull 
market/up breakout, bear market/down breakout) have the most triangles act- 
ing as continuation patterns (like swimming with the current). The counter- 
trend columns, the two inner ones, show more reversals than continuations as 
price struggles trying to swim against a current. 

Reversal/continuation performance. Reversals perform slightly better 
than continuations for upward breakouts. Downward breakouts don’t show a 
significant performance difference. 

Average rise or decline. The average rise is a disappointing 34% in bull 
markets. This figure is well off the pace set by other chart pattern types (aver- 
age: 42.4%). The other columns also show below-average performance when 
compared to other patterns. 


Table 66.2 
General Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Number found 1,950 394 1,300 441 
Reversal (R), 40% R, 60% C 55% R, 45% C 59%R, 41% C 46% R, 54% C 

continuation (C) 

occurrence 
Reversal, 36% R, 33% C 27%R, 25% C -12%R,-13% C -19%R, -19% C 

continuation 

performance 
Average rise 34% 26% -12% -19% 

or decline 
Standard & Poor’s 10% 1% -2% -10% 

500 change 
Days to ultimate 176 69 42 33 

high or low 
How many 45% 35% 22% 39% 


change trend? 


1028 Triangles, Symmetrical 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Notice how the general market, as 
measured by the S&P 500 index, helped or hindered the performance of the 
average symmetrical triangle. Consider that the best rise is 34% in bull mar- 
kets for triangles with upward breakouts. That figure corresponds to a 10% 
rise in the index. A falling general market (-10%) helped triangles with down- 
ward breakouts in bear markets. They dropped 19% on average. 

What does all this mean? Trade with the market and industry trends for 
best results. If both are trending in the same direction as your stock, you stand 
a better chance of making money. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Triangles in bull markets take longer to 
reach the ultimate high than bear markets take to reach the ultimate low. 

I compared the price velocity of bull markets with bear markets and 
found price climbed twice as fast in bear markets as in bull ones. Downward 
breakouts show the same velocity: Bear markets see price fall twice as fast as 
in bull markets. 

How many change trend? This is a count of how many patterns see 
price move more than 20% after the breakout. I like to see values above 50%, 
but the triangle falls well short of that in every column. Other chart patterns 
show better trending ability. 

I think what’s happening is that the symmetrical triangle is happy seeing 
price bounce up and down like a fishing bobber. Even after the breakout, price 
doesn’t trend as well as other chart patterns as it continues to bob up and down. 

Table 66.3 shows failure rates for symmetrical triangles. For small 
declines, triangles with downward breakouts in bear markets have the lowest 
failure rates. After a maximum price rise of 10%, triangles with upward break- 
outs in bull markets show a smaller failure rate. 


Table 66.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum 
Price Rise or Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Decline (%) Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 495 or 25% 92 or 23% 480 or 37% 85 or 19% 
10 274 or 39% 78 or 43% 269 or 58% 76 or 37% 
15 180 or 49% 44 or 54% 141 or 68% 60 or 50% 
20 118 or 55% 42 or 65% 130 or 78% 47 or 61% 
25 114 or 61% 27 or 72% 96 or 86% 50 or 72% 
30 96 or 65% 23 or 78% 55 or 90% 29 or 79% 
35 85 or 70% 17 or 82% 50 or 94% 17 or 83% 
50 142 or 77% 37 or 91% 61 or 99% 56 or 95% 
75 192 or 87% 16 or 95% 17 or 100% 21 or 100% 


Over 75 254 0r 100% 18o0r 100% 1 or 100% 0 or 100% 


Statistics 1029 


How do you read the table? I know your eyes probably glaze over when 
you see a table swimming with numbers, but consider the bull market, up 
breakout column. A quarter of the patterns fail to climb more than 15%. 

Downward breakouts in bull markets have the highest failure rates: 58% 
fail to see price drop more than 10%. 

Say you want to shoot for the moon and make 50%. How many triangles 
perform that well after an upward breakout in a bull market? Answer: 23%. 
That is, 77% will fail to see price rise more than 50%. 

Table 66.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The trend followers have the most breakouts. That’s 
bull market/upward breakouts and bear market/down breakouts. 

Yearly position, performance. Where do the best performing trian- 
gles appear? Las Vegas? Atlantic City? No. Apparently the answer is all over 
because the table shows only a mild preference for those within a third of the 
yearly low in the two right columns. 

You will want to avoid those patterns with breakouts within a third of the 
yearly high. Even so, in many cases the performance difference between the 
values isn’t wide. 

Apex distance. The median distance from the start of the triangle to the 
breakout is in the low-to-mid-70s. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about 
two-thirds of the time. Price trends for 5 or 6 days before making the return 
trip back to the breakout price for a round-trip of 10 to 12 days. 

When triangles have throwbacks or pullbacks, performance suffers. 
That’s true in all columns. For example, triangles in bull markets that throw 
back show rises averaging 30%. Without a throwback, the rise averages 41%. 

To avoid a throwback or pullback, look for nearby (within 10% away) 
overhead resistance or underlying support before trading the triangle. 

Gaps. In three of four columns, the appearance of a breakout day gap 
helps performance, not by a lot, but some. I calculate performance using the 
opening price the day after a gap, so you don’t have to own the stock to partici- 
pate in better performance for patterns showing a gap. 

Table 66.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones under all market 
conditions and breakout directions except for the right column (bear market/ 
down breakout, where it’s a tie). 

However, for the best performance, select a tall pattern, as measured 
from the highest minor high to the lowest minor low in the triangle. Divide 
the height by the breakout price and compare it to the median in the table. 
If your result is above the median, then you have a tall pattern. 

Width. Wide patterns also perform better, except for triangles in bear mar- 
kets with downward breakouts (again, that column shows a tie). I used the median 
length shown in the table as the separator between wide and narrow. I’m impressed 
that the median width across the four columns is about the same: 35 to 37 days. 


1030 


Triangles, Symmetrical 


Table 66.4 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 60% up 47% up 40% down 53% down 
Performance of L 34%, L 29%, L-14%, L -20%, 
breakouts occur- M 35%, M 29%, M -13%, M -18%, 
ring near the H 34% H 20% H -10% H -18% 
12-month low 
(L), middle (M), 
or high (H) 
Median breakout 74% 75% 74% 72% 
distance to apex 
Throwbacks/ 62% 65% 65% 67% 
pullbacks 
occurrence 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


Average time to 
throwback/ 
pullback ends 


Average rise/decline 
for patterns with 
throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 


Average rise/decline 
for patterns with- 
out throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 


Percentage price 
resumes trend 


Performance with 
breakout day gap 


Performance with- 
out breakout 
day gap 

Average gap size 


4% in 6 days 


12 days 


30% 


41% 


61% 


35% 


34% 


$0.38 


7% in 5 days 


11 days 


23% 


32% 


48% 


23% 


27% 


$0.24 


-4% in 5 days 


12 days 


-11% 


-15% 


44% 


-14% 


-12% 


$0.40 


-7% in 5 days 


10 days 


-17% 


-23% 


49% 


-21% 


-19% 


$0.50 


Height and width combinations. You would think that three of the col- 
umns that have tall patterns outperforming and wide patterns outperforming 
would show the best performance for patterns both tall and wide. That’s not 
the case, though. Each column has its own preference. 

Table 66.6 shows volume-related statistics. 


Statistics 1031 


Volume trend. Nearly all of the time volume trends downward from the 
pattern start to the end, as verified using linear regression. 

Rising/Falling volume. In three of four columns (the right column, 
again, is the exception), a falling volume trend sees the best performance. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume helps performance 
(except in bear markets with downward breakouts). I wonder why the right 
column is the renegade? 

Table 66.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location, but because 
my computer doesn’t calculate the stops for symmetricals properly, I removed 
the table. 

Table 66.8 shows the performance over three decades but does not 
include bear markets (which only happened in the 2000s). 

Performance over time. Performance of symmetrical triangles has 
decreased over the decades, from 41% during the 1990s to 29% in the 2010s 
(upward breakouts). 

Downward breakouts also show performance has suffered, but not dra- 
matically so (probably because the numbers are close to zero anyway. How low 
can they go?). 


Table 66.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern 42% 32% -15% -19% 
performance 
Short pattern 27% 21% -10% -19% 
performance 
Median height as 10.1% 18.3% 11.4% 19.0% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 31% 19% -12% -19% 
performance 
Wide pattern 38% 33% -13% -19% 
performance 
Median width 35 days 37 days 35 days 36 days 
Short and narrow 27% 14% -10% -20% 
performance 
Short and wide 26% 34% -9% -19% 
performance 
Tall and wide 43% 33% -14% -20% 
performance 
Tall and narrow 39% 29% -16% -17% 


performance 


1032 ‘Triangles, Symmetrical 


Table 66.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 84% down 82% down 86% down 84% down 
Rising volume 33% 24% -11% -21% 

trend 

performance 
Falling volume 35% 26% -12% -19% 

trend 

performance 
Heavy breakout 36% 27% -13% -19% 

volume 

performance 
Light breakout 32% 25% -12% -20% 

volume 

performance 

Table 66.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 41% -14% 
2000s 38% -12% 
2010s 29% -12% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 18% 24% 
2000s 17% 38% 
2010s 34% 41% 


Failures over time. Failures were steady until the 2010s when they dou- 
bled (upward breakouts). Downward breakouts have seen failures increase over 
the last three decades. By failures, ’m counting how many patterns failed to 
see price rise or fall by more than 5%. 

Table 66.9 shows busted pattern performance. I did a study (not using the 
most recent data) and found that symmetrical triangles bust more often than any 
of the other patterns studied (about a dozen variations of popular patterns). 

Busted patterns count. The table shows how many triangles bust. 
Recall that a bust happens when price moves no more than 10% in the break- 
out direction before veering off and trending in the opposite direction. Price 
then has to close beyond the triangle. (For downward breakouts, that means it 
has to close above the top of the triangle. For upward breakouts, that means a 
close below the bottom of the triangle.) 


Trading Tactics 1033 


Table 66.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns 624 or 32% 95 or 24% 624 or 48% 95 or 22% 

count 
Single bust count 285 or 46% 65 or 68% 416 or 67% 54 or 57% 
Double bust count 204 or 33% 17 or 18% 36 or 6% 7 or 7% 
Triple+ bust count 1350r22% 130r14% 172 or 28% 34 or 36% 
Performance for all -13% -18% 37% 18% 

busted patterns 
Single busted -23% -24% 52% 28% 

performance 
Non-busted -12% -19% 34% 26% 

performance 


Busted occurrence. I don’t like to see 46% of patterns that bust are single 
busted (bull market, up breakout). The number should be much higher, like the 
67% we see for Eve & Eve double tops. Why my preference? Because single 
busted patterns usually outperform their non-busted counterparts, but there’s no 
sure way to determine if a pattern will single, double, or triple+ (more than two) 
bust. Thus, having a high single bust rate makes trading a busted pattern more 
reliable (you hope it busts just once). The higher the single bust rate the better. 

Anyway, single busted patterns happen most often, as the table shows. 
Triple+ busts place second for frequency for downward breakouts. 

Busted and non-busted performance. The last three rows in the table 
are my attempt to compare busted and non-busted performance. Can you 
make more money trading a busted pattern? 

The answer is yes, providing the pattern single busts. I would stick to 
trading busted downward breakouts in bull markets. Sixty-seven percent of 
busts will be single ones, and price rises an average of 52% above the top of 
the triangle (to the ultimate high). That percentage is quite an incentive. Even 
if you only make half that it’s a tasty hors d’oeuvre. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 66.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. There are two types of measure rules for sym- 
metrical triangles. Figure 66.6 shows the first one. Compute the triangle’s height 
from highest high (point B at 9.75) to lowest low (point A at 8.38). Either add or 
subtract the difference, 1.37, from the breakout price depending on the breakout 
direction. In this case, the breakout is upward, so the target price becomes 10.50 
(that is, 9.13 + 1.37). Price reaches the target in less than a month. 


1034 Triangles, Symmetrical 


Table 66.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the triangle’s height by subtracting the lowest low from the 
highest high. For upward breakouts, add the difference to the break- 
out price or for downward breakouts, subtract the difference. Alter- 
natively, symmetrical triangles can be halfway points in a move, so 
project accordingly. The bottom portion of the table shows how often 
price reaches the measure rule target. 


Wait for Always wait for the breakout in case the triangle reverses. 
breakout 
Busted patterns If a triangle breaks out downward, drops no more than 10% before 
reversing, and closes above the top of the triangle, then buy. 


Apex turning When price reaches the date of the apex, expect a minor high or low to 
appear. It might become a major turning point for the stock. 


Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching 74% 59% 58% 60% 

half height target 
Percentage reaching 58% 36% 36% 39% 

full height target 
Percentage reaching 41% 18% 16% 18% 

2x height 
Percentage reaching 30% 10% 8% 11% 

3x height 


The bottom portion of the table shows how often this method works. 
I used the full height of the pattern in the example during a bull market. The 
table says there’s a 58% chance that the stock will reach the target before 
reversing and forming a new trend. If you cut the height in half and add it to 
the breakout price, the stock will reach the closer target 74% of the time. 

For downward breakouts, if the target is below zero, then ignore it. The 
stock won’t go below zero, at least not in this universe. And if it does, we prob- 
ably won’t be around to see it. 

For both breakout directions, if the target is too far away (divide the 
height by the current price and express it as a percentage), then ignore it. Use 
Table 66.3 to help you decide how likely it will be for the stock to reach a target. 

In our example, the height is 1.37 and the breakout price is 9.13 for a 
potential gain of 1.37/9.13 or 15%. Table 66.3 says that after an upward break- 
out in bull markets, nearly half (49%) of patterns will fail to see price rise 
more than 15%. 

Some symmetrical triangles act like larger versions of pennants. They are 
half-staff patterns and mark the halfway point in a move (like a measured move 
up or down chart pattern). Had the triangle broken out downward, it might 
have continued down and fulfilled the measure rule. 


Experience 1035 


In such a case, the measure from point C (on the left at 11.88 is the start 
of the move leading to the triangle) to point A (the bottom of the triangle) 
should be subtracted from the value of point B (the triangle’s high). The result 
is the target price of 6.25. 

Use one or both measure rules as appropriate to the situation. The first 
method, using the formation height, is the more conservative of the two and 
more likely to be fulfilled. 

Wait for breakout. Always wait for a breakout. Occasionally, price 
squeezes out the triangle apex and has no breakout at all (until it moves far 
enough to show a trend). This is a rarity, but it does happen. Once price shows 
a trend preference, trade with the trend: Go long if price breaks out upward 
and short after downward breakouts (or skip the trade and look elsewhere). 

Busted patterns. I have noticed that even when price breaks out in 
an adverse direction (a reversal of the prevailing trend), it quickly reverses 
again and resumes the original trend. This means, for example, in an upward 
trend price breaks out downward and falls by 10% or less, then heads back 
up and finishes much higher. Figures 66.2 and 66.3 show examples. This 
behavior for reversals is something to watch out for, especially for down- 
ward breakouts in a raging bull market. Trading these busted patterns can 
be profitable. 

Apex turning. Look at Figure 66.6. See how price turns a day or two in 
front of the triangle’s apex? Figure 66.1 shows another example where a minor 
high appears the day before the two trendlines merge. In other words, look for 
price to make a minor high or low near the date of the triangle’s apex. 

I measured how often this works and wrote an article about it on my 
website (http://thepatternsite.com/Apex.html). I concluded, “Price reaches a 
minor high or minor low 75% of the time within a few days of the triangle 
apex. Price turns from down to up or up to down 60% of the time.” 

If you draw your triangle accurately enough, then you’ll know where 
price may turn by looking at the apex. 


Experience 


I have traded symmetrical triangles more than 60 times over the years. For a 
few lessons, let’s look at sales using symmetrical triangles because that’s where 
you get the most value from analyzing trades. 


TD Ameritrade Inc. 


The first one comes from TD Ameritrade Inc. (AMTD) in 2004. Here’s what 
I wrote in my notebook: “21 January 2004. I bought at market, filled at 17.11. 
Earnings were announced yesterday, and the stock popped up. I expect an 
earnings flag [an event pattern] and decide to buy in at a good price before 
that happens. The company expects a strong fiscal 2004 and so do I. I’ve been 


1036 ‘Triangles, Symmetrical 


trading more than ever. I thought of doubling my usual position, but consider 
my enthusiasm is getting carried away. Still, I view this as an easy way to make 
money—a lock, if you will. Downside is a partial retrace to 15, say 16. If it 
closes below 15, then sell. Upside is unknown. It might hesitate at 22, the site 
of a prior peak in late 2000. That’s my goal.” 

Less than a week later, I made another notebook entry: “27 January 
2004. I bought at market, filled at 16.82. I believe this is an easy profit winner 
because of the market excitement. People are buying stock, and this broker 
will make money hand-over-fist, so I doubled my position. Upside is the old 
high at about 22. The stock will cup-with-handle there. Expect a pullback 
in the handle, then a resumption of the uptrend if price climbs above the 
right cup lip.” 

Both of these trades were near the yearly high, before the symmetrical 
triangle appeared. 

Two months later, the party was over. Here’s my notebook: “11 February 
2004. I sold my holdings at market, filled at 14.73 to 14.75. This has broken 
down out of a symmetrical triangle and looks to be headed lower. This is one 
of those ‘can’t lose’ trades that I firmly believed would be a winner because of 
the strong fundamentals. 

“Often, I have found that they turn into a disaster. The good news is that 
I got out. I waited for price to climb off the daily low of 14.33. It recovered to 
14.88 but dropped to 14.73 before I could get out.” 

I’ve noticed in my trading that the more confident I am of making a 
profit, the worse I’ll get hammered. When the trade begins to go bad, I’ll be 
in denial, that I know the stock will recover. And each day, price drops. Soon, 
you’ve lost so much money that you stop following the stock because you don’t 
want to wade through all of the blood. 

More recently, I don’t let my trading bother me at all. Losses are the 
cost of doing business. If I stick to my trading plan, then ’m happy, until I get 
whipped out of a position that sees the stock double in price. Yes, that both- 
ers me. Or worse, the stock doubles but you hope for more, and then it drops 
in half, not overnight, but as a slow drip, drip, drip that you don’t notice until 
your downstairs furniture is floating. 

In this trade, things didn’t get nearly that bad. I sold after the downward 
breakout from the triangle, so I limited the losses. On the two trades, I lost 
13% and 14%, which is significantly higher than the 8% or less I like to see. 
I followed my trading plan and got out promptly. The stock continued lower 
to 9.35 or 37% below my sale price. Thanks goodness I sold. 


¢ Lesson: Never fall in love with a stock and never get overconfident that 
a trade will work. If you hear yourself saying things like “Everything 
I touch turns to gold,” “I can’t lose,” or “This is an easy game,” then 
yow’re about to take a major loss. 


Experience 1037 


Northwest Pipe Co. 


In Northwest Pipe Co. (NWPX), I bought the upward breakout from a con- 
firmed head-and-shoulders bottom in December 2005. From my notebook: 
“Buy reason: head-and-shoulders bottom with throwback complete. Buy again 
plans: None. I don’t trust this chart pattern, and the stock is thinly traded.” 

This trade started out the opposite way compared to the Ameritrade 
trade: skepticism. 

About a month later, the stock formed a symmetrical triangle. “Sell 
reason: This has gapped downward outside of a small symmetrical triangle 
and the CCI [commodity channel index] says sell. MACD [moving average 
convergence/divergence] shows declining momentum. This really didn’t work 
as expected, so it’s time to leave. If ’m lucky, I’ll make a few bucks, but it’ll be 
close to 0.” 

I made 1%, but that’s not why I’m describing the trade. The stock 
rubbed my nose in it and decided to climb. The ultimate high wasn’t far off, 
30.88, which the stock reached 2 months later. That’s a gain of 15% above my 
sale price. 

What irks me about the trade is this was a 5% failure. Meaning the stock 
broke out downward. I sold, and the very next day the stock started climbing. 
It meandered up and down before reaching the ultimate high, but I hate being 
kicked out of the stock days to weeks before it resumes climbing. 


¢ Lesson: Before selling, determine how far price might fall. It’s always 
best to follow your trading plan, but be flexible. In this case, I’d prob- 
ably trade it the same way. 


Questar Corp. 


Questar Corp. (STR) did the same thing. I bought in the middle of a symmet- 
rical triangle and hoped for an upward breakout. Instead, the stock broke out 
downward and I sold, taking a 2% loss, only to see the stock reverse and climb. 
I sold at 20.10, and the stock peaked at 44.80, more than double my sale price. 

I picked the right stock. It made a huge gain as I predicted it would, but 
it shook me out near the start, so I couldn’t participate. 


¢ Lesson: Wait for the breakout before trading. 
¢ Lesson: If the stock busts, it could lead to large gains. 


In 2008, I traded Questar again. This time, I waited for the upward break- 
out. What happened? The upward breakout busted when the stock dropped. 
I sold and took a 3% loss. The stock continued lower by 17% and reversed, 
climbing 46% before the 2007-2009 bear market took it for a swim 72% lower. 


1038 ‘Triangles, Symmetrical 


Delphi Financial Group Inc. 


I bought into Delphi Financial Group Inc. (DFG) after the 2007-2009 bear 
market ended and received a fill at 22.53. “Buy reason: Bottom of congestion/ 
rectangle region with good quarterly report. It’s at the bottom of a rectangle 
or channel.” 

The stock moved sideways two months, then dipped in January 2010 to 
19.04 but recovered. From there, the stock made a straight-line run-up to peak 
at 28.80 in late April. Then the stock started easing lower, which is probably an 
understatement. The up-and-down swings were tall. ’m talking sequoia tall. 

In June, it formed a symmetrical triangle. When it broke out downward, 
did I sell? No. Apparently I missed it or ignored it. 

So I waited for the pullback and sold the day before it peaked during the 
pullback. I made 9% on the trade. The stock continued its violent swing and 
bottomed 11% below my sale price before making an extended recovery, rising 
43% with me waving from the sidelines. 


¢ Lesson: If you miss seeing an adverse breakout, wait for a throwback or 
pullback to occur and trade it for a better price on the exit. 


Sample Trade 


Can you make money on symmetrical triangles? Yes. Consider the trade I 
made in the stock shown in Figure 66.6. There were a number of factors 


Varco International, Inc (Oilfield Svcs./Equipment, NYSE, VRC) 


Two Standard Deviations 
Away from Linear Regression 
Trend Line 


Sold ! 
rue 1 M Rul “Ah Mt 
{ I easure Rule 


Target Price Se i | | 


Px 
aT 
ui u| 


- 10 


Bought - 9 


Throwback 


Sep 95 Oct Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar 


Figure 66.6 Measure rule for symmetrical triangles. Use the measure rule to pre- 
dict the target price. Subtract the low (point A) from the high (point B) and add 
the difference to the breakout price (point D). 


Sample Trade 1039 


that led me to this stock, including a rising rig count, rising oil price, cold 
weather, and related political events (OPEC tightening and possible oil boy- 
cott against Nigeria). All of these factors suggested the price of oil during the 
winter would continue rising and demand for the oil field services industry 
would remain strong. 

Another factor was that the stock price was riding along the bottom of 
a trend channel. The method used to create the trend channel is somewhat 
complicated, but it involves drawing a line using linear regression on the clos- 
ing price and then plotting two lines parallel to the regression line, each two 
standard deviations away. 

The figure shows the upper line of the channel. I did not draw the lower 
line, but it intersects point A and is parallel to the top channel line. The trend 
channel suggests price would move from one side of the channel to the other. 

Since the upward breakout was on weak volume, I decided to hold off and 
wait for a throwback. This was a risky maneuver, but it worked. On December 
1, I bought the stock and received a fill at 9.13. 

The apex of a symmetrical triangle is often a place of support or resist- 
ance. You can see this on the chart. Price declined to the apex and stayed there 
for 3 days. As predicted, the stock took off and climbed after that. Even though 
the stock fulfilled the measure rule, I suspected that it would continue crossing 
to the upper channel line. The stock stalled out midway across the channel, 
pausing at the linear regression line (not shown, but it is equidistant between 
the top channel line and point A). This pause is often the case, and I was antic- 
ipating it. 

In about a week, price started moving up again and quickly made a new 
high. When price touched the top of the trend channel, I considered selling 
but did not for tax reasons. I decided to hold off until the New Year—just 2 
trading days away. On January 2 I sold the stock and received a fill at 11.63. 
The delay in selling dropped my return from nearly 40% to 27%. Still, that is 
not a bad return for a hold time of 1 month! 


67 


Triple Bottoms 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: After a downward price trend, three distinct minor lows appear at about 
the same price. Price confirms the pattern when it closes above the highest peak in 
the pattern. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term Short-term bullish 
bullish reversal reversal 
Performance rank 12 out of 39 11 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 13% 13% 
Average rise 46% 27% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
‘Throwbacks 65% 67% 
Percentage meeting price target 74% 55% 
See also Broadening bottoms; broadening formations, 


right-angled and descending; broadening 
wedges, descending; head-and-shoulders 
bottoms; head-and-shoulders bottoms, 
complex; triangles, descending; three 
rising valleys 


1040 


Tour 1041 


Triple bottoms act as reversals of the downward price trend by definition. 
They appear after a downtrend as three valleys that bottom near the same 
price. Price climbs after the pattern ends. 

How well does the pattern work? The performance rank shows it’s closer 
to 1 (best) than the end of the list (for upward breakouts, anyway). Failure 
rates, based on how often the pattern fails to see price rise more than 5% after 
the breakout, rank 16 and 10, for bull and bear markets, respectively. That’s 
about mid-list. 

Volume trends downward most often. Throwbacks occur about two- 
thirds of the time, which is what we see in most other types of chart patterns. 
Finally, price reaches the measure rule target between half (55%) and three 
quarters (74%) of the time on average. 

What does all of this mean? I’ve traded this pattern over a dozen times 
and have struggled to make money doing so. The problems center around havy- 
ing my stop taking me out of stocks that go on to make a lot of money. Other 
trades suffer from 5% failures or trading mistakes. I’ll discuss more of this in 
the Experience section. 

Let’s take a tour of this pattern to see what separates a triple bottom from 
other chart patterns, like a head-and-shoulders bottom. 


Tour 


Figure 67.1 shows an example of a triple bottom. Price drops from a peak at 
D down to the triple bottom that appears at ABC. The three valleys are near 


Advanced Energy (AEIS) 


hh a? 
* i \ 1 82 


atl , i 
f 4 Hiya 54 


Confirmation Line 50 


rie | es] | 
ity . f | t. flys \W | : 
f hy? " Q why i Pinte ly 


Cc 


' hy ke | 48 


19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan20 Feb Mar 


Figure 67.1 This triple bottom forms the reversal portion of a Big W chart pattern. 


1042 Triple Bottoms 


the same price with the B valley at or slightly above the other two. In other 
words, it’s not poking downward below the adjacent valleys. If the middle 
valley was lower than the surrounding ones, then it could be a head-and- 
shoulders bottom. 

Volume (F) slopes downward as it does most of the time in triple bottoms, 
but don’t throw away a triple bottom just because volume trends upward. 

The pattern confirms as valid when price closes above the top of the pat- 
tern. That happens at the confirmation line (shown). Remember, price has to 
close above the line. A close helps prevent premature breakouts, where price 
pokes its head above the confirmation line but drops back down soon after 
(perhaps the next day). 

In this case, the stock climbs back to the launch price. The launch price 
is D (where the downtrend to the pattern begins) and price recovers to E. 
A return to the launch price is not always the case, so don’t depend on it hap- 
pening, but the launch price can make for a good target. 

This triple bottom looks like the bottom of a Big W chart pattern. The 
left side of the W is at D, the right side is at FE, with a reversal pattern between 
the tall sides. The drop from D to A is a long one, which is required by the Big 
W. Usually we see double bottoms as the reversal pattern, but in this case, the 
triple bottom appears. 

Let’s look at identification guidelines so we can help separate triple bot- 
toms from other types of chart patterns. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 67.1 lists guidelines for identifying triple bottoms, and Figure 67.2 
shows an example. 

Appearance. I think most technical analysts will tell you that not just any 
three bottoms will do for a triple bottom. The three bottoms are usually large 
and well separated with generally rounded rises in between (but allow excep- 
tions like that shown in Figure 67.1). The lowest price in each bottom is at 
about the same level. If the center price is lower than the other two, then you 
might be looking at a head-and-shoulders bottom. When the bottoms are suc- 
cessively lower in price, it might be one of the broadening series of patterns. 
If price at each bottom rises successively, then it could be a three rising valleys 
chart pattern. 

In the figure, notice the three bottoms. Each bottom is distinct and sepa- 
rated with the rally between them quite pronounced. Price rises far enough to 
close above the top of the pattern, confirming it as a valid triple bottom. 

Price trend. If price rises into the start of a triple bottom, is it still a 
bottom? Answer: I’m not sure. Perhaps in the next edition I’ll separate triple 
bottoms into reversals and continuations, where price either drops into the 


Identification Guidelines 1043 


Table 67.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Look for three minor lows, well separated and distinct, at the end 


of a downward price trend. 


Price trend Price trends lower into the triple bottom so that it acts as a reversal. 
However, sometimes the pattern will act as a continuation of the 
upward price trend. 

Same price The price variation among the three bottoms is minor. The center 
bottom should not be significantly below the other two, other- 
wise it is a head-and-shoulders bottom. 


Volume The overall volume trend is usually downward but may be high in 
each of the three bottoms. Volume is usually highest on the first 
bottom and weakest on the last one. 


Breakout direction, | Breakout is always upward when price closes above the highest 
confirmation peak between the three bottoms. If it doesn’t break out upward, 
then it’s not a triple bottom. 


Whirlpool Corp (Home Appliance, NYSE, WHR) 


2 hh ON ihe 
i | tt 1! iil | Ne” —~44 

MW My Prt 
| ia Why Confirmation Line oe 
ae i “ey “39 


\ wolf il 
lt 


Third Bottom 


: First Bottom Second Bottom ~ 34 


Apr 92 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 93 Feb 


Figure 67.2 Atriple bottom with three widely spaced, distinct troughs. A broaden- 
ing top appears in mid-November. 


pattern as in the traditional triple bottom or rises into it so that the triple bot- 
tom acts as a continuation pattern. For this edition, though, I am sticking with 
the traditional approach and saying that price should trend downward into the 
start of the chart pattern, emphasizing that it is a bottoming, reversal pattern. 


1044 Triple Bottoms 


The figure shows price on the far left of the chart well above the first 
bottom so that the price trend is downward to the first bottom. 

Same price. Look for three valleys that bottom at or near the same price. 
Sometimes you'll see the middle valley slightly above the other two, which 
makes it easy to assign the triple bottom name to the pattern. 

When the middle valley is below the other two, then you have to gauge 
if it’s far enough below the adjacent valleys to call the pattern a head-and- 
shoulders bottom. It’s a judgment call. Use the figures in this chapter for 
guidance of what to look for. 

Volume. The volume trend usually recedes over the course of the pat- 
tern. Since triple bottoms tend to be long patterns, volume can appear ragged 
or irregular at times. Each of the three bottoms usually shows volume that 
peaks above the days leading to the bottom, with the first bottom usually hav- 
ing the highest volume of the trio. Don’t discard a chart pattern because the 
volume pattern looks weird. 

The volume trend in this chart pattern (see the figure) is downward 
with the largest concentration of high volume on the first bottom. The center 
bottom has subdued volume and is even lower on the third bottom in early 
October. Volume spikes upward as price rises to the confirmation point in 
mid-November. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. In the triple bottom shown in the 
figure, price rises from the low of about 35 to the confirmation line just over 
40. The confirmation line is the highest high reached between the three bot- 
toms. It serves as the breakout point, the point to which price must close above 
before any three minor lows become a true triple bottom. 


Focus on Failures 


Once price reaches the confirmation line, it usually has been rising for about 3 
weeks on average since the third bottom. Price often pierces the resistance line 
but doubles back, hesitating before continuing up. 

In some cases, price rises above the confirmation point by less than 5% 
before throwing back and continuing down. When that happens, it is called 
a 5% failure. In this study of triple bottoms, all chart patterns must stage an 
upward breakout (a close above the highest high in the chart pattern) before 
being labeled a triple bottom. Since all patterns have upward breakouts, only 
5% failures remain to wipe the warm glow of a successful investment from a 
novice investor's face. Figure 67.3 shows an example of such a failure. 

This is a triple bottom because price closes above the confirmation line in 
mid-September, confirming the three bottoms as belonging to a triple bottom. 
But the rise is brief—only 1 day has a close above the confirmation line before 
price tumbles. 


Statistics 1045 


Barrick Gold (Gold/Silver Mining, NYSE, ABX) 
-28 


i Confirmation Line i a 
, i! | hd Ta \, fi ti i i \ i i 
! wy we i -25 
Mh i i jt 


a Second M 


Bottom Bottom Bottom i 


i i 


May 95 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 67.3 A triple bottom failure. This triple bottom fails to make a convincing 
upward run. It is a 5% failure because price fails to rise more than 5% before tumbling. 


What are the signs of an impending failure? In this situation, the curved 
rise leading to the triple bottom suggests a rounded top. The volume pattern is 
suspiciously flat, but an irregular or abnormal pattern is common and should not 
automatically disqualify a triple bottom. Perhaps the most likely failure is not 
one of performance but of identification. Are the three bottoms well separated, 
each a significant minor low in its own right? Are the low prices near to one 
another without the center bottom being meaningfully below the other two? 

As you look at the pattern, it should take on a striking appearance and 
almost shout, “Yes, I am a triple bottom!” There should be something familiar, 
a special quality that distinguishes a valid triple bottom from any other three- 
lump configuration. If it does not scream, “Buy me!” then you should probably 
look elsewhere. 


Statistics 


Table 67.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found oodles of triple bottoms, 3,105 in fact, which 
is odd because I think of triple bottoms as rare (apparently they are plentiful). 
I found them in 787 stocks, starting from July 1991 to April 2019, but not all 
stocks covered the entire period, and some stocks no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Because price is supposed 
to drop into a triple bottom (by one definition, anyway), they act as reversals of 
the downward price trend when they break out upward. 


1046 Triple Bottoms 


Table 67.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 2,549 550 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average rise 46% 27% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% -1% 
Days to ultimate high 267 74 
How many change trend? 58% 44% 


Average rise. The average rise in bull markets is slightly above that 
posted by other bullish chart patterns, but the bear market rise is slightly below 
the average (of all other chart pattern types). Concentrate on finding and trad- 
ing triple bottoms in bull markets. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In bull markets, the index climbed 13%, 
helping lift the average rise of the triple bottom. In bear markets, the 1% decline 
is weak but still restrains the upward climb after a triple bottom breakout. 

Days to ultimate high. By comparing the ratio of a 46% rise in 267 days 
in bull markets to a 27% rise in 74 days during bear markets, we find that price 
climbs more than twice as fast in bear markets as in bull ones. I don’t really 
understand why this is, but I’ve seen it in many other chart pattern types. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many triple bottoms 
see price rise more than 20%. It’s my attempt to compare how “trendy” a chart 
pattern is. I like to see values higher than 50% in the bull market. In bear mar- 
kets, the value in the table is below the average for other chart pattern types. 

Table 67.3 shows failure rates for triple bottoms. The rates start small 
if you consider 13% as “small,” but climb rapidly. For example, 13% of triple 
bottoms in bull markets fail to see price rise more than 5%. This figure dou- 
bles to 26% failing to rise more than 10% and almost triples (to 35%) the 
breakeven rate for a maximum price rise of 15%. 

Notice that the bull market failures are smaller than the bear market 
ones, which is further evidence that you should avoid trading triple bottoms 
in bear markets. 

Table 67.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The breakout is upward all of the time from a triple 
bottom by definition. A breakout happens when price closes above the tallest 
peak between the three bottoms. If price closes below the lowest valley in the 
pattern first, then it’s not a triple bottom. 

Yearly position, performance. Here’s one of those head-scratchers. In 
bull markets the best performance comes from patterns with breakouts within 
a third of the yearly high. As the breakout price rises (from the lowest third to 
the highest third), performance improves. 


Statistics 1047 


Table 67.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 338 or 13% 70 or 13% 
10 317 or 26% 87 or 29% 
15 238 or 35% 91 or 45% 
20 178 or 42% 61 or 56% 
25 164 or 48% 59 or 67% 
30 148 or 54% 38 or 74% 
35 128 or 59% 28 or 79% 
50 283 or 70% 56 or 89% 
75 297 or 82% 29 or 94% 
Over 75 458 or 100% 31 or 100% 
Table 67.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% up 100% up 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L 43%, M 45%, L 31%, M 28%, 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H 46% H 23% 
Throwbacks occurrence 65% 67% 
Average time to throwback peaks 6% in 6 days 8% in 6 days 
Average time to throwback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 44% 23% 
Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 48% 34% 
Percentage price resumes trend 76% 66% 
Performance with breakout day gap 46% 28% 
Performance without breakout day gap 45% 26% 
Average gap size $0.62 $0.55 


In bear markets, we see the reverse. As the breakout price rises from the 
lowest third to the highest, performance decreases so that the lowest third has 
the best performance. 

This is one of the reasons I suggest that if you short a stock, do so from 
patterns near the yearly low, not the yearly high. 

Throwbacks. A throwback occurs in about two out of three trades, and it 
takes 12 days (on average) for the stock to return to the breakout price. When 
a throwback occurs, performance suffers. 


1048 Triple Bottoms 


For example, in bull markets, the average rise when a throwback happens 
is 44%. Without a throwback, the rise averages 48%. That’s not because I’m 
looking at few samples, either (I used 2,549 in the test). 

We’ve seen this kind of behavior in other chart pattern types, too. 

After a throwback completes, the good news is that price resumes rising 
more than 66% of the time (on average). 

Gaps. Gaps help performance, but not by a lot. To find this, I used the 
opening price the day after a gap as the buy price and measured the rise to 
the ultimate high. So if you didn’t own the stock as it gapped up, you can still 
buy and participate in the better performance. Given that the percentages are 
close together, you probably won’t notice the difference. You have to trade it 
perfectly and often, too. 

Good luck with that. 

Table 67.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns significantly outperform short ones. This is the 
kind of performance difference I like to see! In fact, height is the best indicator 
of future performance (for most chart patterns). 

‘To use this finding, compute the height of the triple bottom from tallest 
peak to lowest valley (in the pattern). Divide the height by the breakout price 
(the tallest peak). If the result is above the median shown in the table, then you 
have a tall pattern. That’s when you can break into song and tell the world that 
you’ve found a tall triple bottom. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones. The perfor- 
mance difference isn’t as big as for height, but it’s there. I used the median 
length of the triple bottom as the separator between wide and narrow. 


Table 67.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 51% 29% 
Short pattern performance 40% 24% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 9.9% 14.7% 
Narrow pattern performance 43% 26% 
Wide pattern performance 48% 27% 
Median width 39 days 41 days 
Short and narrow performance 39% 26% 
Short and wide performance 44% 18% 
Tall and wide performance 50% 30% 


Tall and narrow performance 54% 27% 


Statistics 1049 


Height and width combinations. Here’s where our tale gets confusing. 
We know that tall patterns outperform, and we know that wide patterns out- 
perform. Don’t you think that a pattern both tall and wide would outperform? 
They may, but tall and narrow patterns show the best performance in bull mar- 
kets. Bear markets behave themselves with tall and wide patterns doing best. 

Table 67.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression on volume to determine slope. 
I found that volume trends downward over 60% of the time. 

Rising/Falling volume. Triple bottoms with rising volume in bull mar- 
kets tend to outperform those with falling volume. Bear market patterns don’t 
care either way. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy (above-average) breakout volume helps 
performance in both bull and bear markets. That’s good news because it agrees 
with market lore. 

Table 67.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I found this by 
watching as price climbed to the ultimate high. If it dipped along the way and 
moved into the triple bottom, then I screamed like a banshee and logged it. 

I found that the top of the pattern will trip a stop placed there about 
three-quarters of the time. That sounds low but not if you consider that price 
might reach the ultimate high during a throwback. Price might return to the 
chart pattern, but it’s after it reaches the ultimate high, so it doesn’t count 
(for the statistics, anyway). 

Placing a stop in the middle or at the bottom of the pattern will trig- 
ger less often than those placed at the top of the pattern. That makes sense, 
of course. 


Table 67.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 61% down 62% down 
Rising volume trend performance 48% 27% 
Falling volume trend performance 44% 27% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 47% 27% 
Light breakout volume performance 41% 26% 

Table 67.7 

How Often Stops Hit 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 76% 74% 
Middle 22% 14% 


Pattern bottom 4% 1% 


1050 ‘Triple Bottoms 


Table 67.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s AA% 
2000s 47% 
2010s 45% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 11% 
2000s 11% 
2010s 16% 

Table 67.9 

Busted Patterns 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 599 or 23% 138 or 25% 
Single bust count 316 or 53% 96 or 70% 
Double bust count 186 or 31% 30 or 22% 
Triple+ bust count 97 or 16% 12 or 9% 
Performance for all busted patterns -14% -20% 
Single busted performance -23% -27% 
Non-busted performance (triple top) -14% -22% 


After you decide where to place a stop, remember to change the potential 
loss into a percentage of the current price to see how big the loss might be. 
You might want to adjust the stop location or abandon the trade entirely if you 
can’t make the potential loss reasonable without unduly increasing the risk of 
a failed trade (by moving the stop too close). 

Table 67.8 shows the performance over three decades. 

Performance over time. For the last three decades, the average rise has 
been steady, with percentages around the mid-40s. 

Failures over time. Failures have ticked higher in the most recent dec- 
ade compared to the other two decades. Note that bear markets only happened 
in the 2000s, so they are not included in the statistics. 

Table 67.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Almost a quarter of triple bottoms will bust. 
That means price climbs no more than 10% before dropping and closing 
below the bottom of the chart pattern. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the busted patterns into how often they 
busted, and the table shows the results. Single busts happened most often 
followed by double and triple+ busts, in that order. In some patterns, we see 
triple+ (meaning more than two busts) busted patterns placing second. 


Trading Tactics 1051 


Table 67.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the pattern’s height from highest high to lowest low in the 
triple bottom. Add the height to the highest high. The result is the 
target price. The bottom portion of the table shows how often price 
reaches the target. 


Wait for Since most three-bottom patterns see price continue lower, always wait 
confirmation for price to rise above the highest high reached in the chart pattern 
(the confirmation price). 
Trade Draw a line connecting the highs. If it slopes down, buy when price 
the trendline closes above it. 
Stop location Use Table 67.7 for help with locating a stop. They’re around here, 
somewhere. 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 88% 80% 
Percentage reaching full height target 74% 55% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 55% 28% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 43% 18% 


Busted and non-busted performance. The last three rows compare 
busted performance with non-busted patterns (triple tops, in this case). 

Single busted triple bottoms outperform triple tops. However, if you 
short any busted triple bottom (meaning single, double, and more than two 
busts), performance is as good as (bull market) or worse (bear market) than the 
average triple top. What that means is if you want to short a busted upward 
breakout, then look for nearby support that might cause price to reverse after 
it busts, causing a double (or more) bust. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 67.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule sets a price target so we can 
assess how often price might reach the target. To use the rule, subtract the low- 
est low from the highest high reached in the triple bottom and then add the 
difference to the highest high. The result is the target price. 

For example, consider the triple bottom shown in Figure 67.4. The low- 
est low occurs on the first bottom at 24.68. Price reaches the highest high 
during the rally after the middle bottom, D, hitting 28.54 for a height of 3.86. 
Add the height to the highest high (D) and the target becomes 32.40. Price 
reaches the target at K. 


1052 Triple Bottoms 


The bottom portion of the table shows how often the stock reaches the 
target price. We used the full height measure in a bull market. The table says 
price will reach the target an average of 74% of the time. 

For a closer target, cut the height in half and add to the highest high in 
the pattern. That will work 88% of the time. 

Once you know the distance to the target, convert it into a percentage of 
the current price and check the result against Table 67.3. Using our example, 
the height is 3.86 and assuming the current price is the breakout price, 28.54, 
it gives a value of 14%. Table 67.3 says that in bull markets 35% of triple bot- 
toms will fail to see price rise more than 15% (the closest entry to 14%). That 
means 65% of the trades will succeed, everything else being equal. Can you 
risk a 35% failure rate? 

Wait for confirmation. When is a triple bottom not a triple bottom? 
When price fails to close above the confirmation price. Always wait for con- 
firmation. On average, it takes about 3 weeks to get there, but it is well worth 
the wait. Waiting for confirmation means you'll avoid those patterns that break 
out downward. 

Trade the trendline. In those patterns with a down-sloping trendline— 
a line joining the twin highs in the pattern—buy the stock when price closes 
above the trendline. That strategy will get you in sooner, lowering your risk 
of failure. 

This idea is similar to using a neckline to enter a trade in a head-and- 
shoulders bottom. When the neckline slopes downward, it can signal a better 
entry price. 

Stop location. If you are so unlucky as to misidentify a triple bottom or 
perhaps catch one that fails, then be sure to place a stop-loss order at a loca- 
tion of your choice. Table 67.7 gives guidance for how often a stop will trip at 
various locations in the triple bottom. 


Experience 


The triple bottoms [ve traded have all been on the buy side. Let me discuss 
some of them. 


Albemarle 


Albemarle (ALB) formed a triple bottom in early to mid-2004. The day after 
price broke out upward from the pattern, I was there with a buy order about 
30 minutes before the close. I received a fill at a split-adjusted price of 15.63. 
In my notebook, I wrote, “Mood (Will trade work? Bought too soon?): 
Not as confident as price dropped after I bought. I feel like I’m trading too 
often. Everything I buy is going up, and that means a crash is coming. I’m 


Experience 1053 


overtrading just because I feel so good doing it. Buy reason: Triple bottom at 
yearly high with upside breakout. Strong base below. Other diversified chemi- 
cals [companies] are trending higher. I expect this to continue moving up.” 

I placed a stop-loss order at 14.19, a few cents below the prior minor low, 
for a potential loss of 9%. Two days after I bought, I raised the stop to 14.76, 
or 6% below my buy price. 

Instead of the stock continuing to move up, it continued to move lower, 
even as | raised the stop. In other words, I bought on the day price peaked. 

It took the stock about 3 weeks to decline to my stop price and take me 
out of the trade at 14.75, the low for the day. Then it climbed from there. So 
I bought at a peak and sold at a valley. Buy high. Sell low. The exact opposite 
of what you should do. Jeepers. I lost 6%. 

I wonder if someone gunned for the stop (forced price down to trig- 
ger the stop). That day was a tall day (big high-low price spread). The stock 
climbed 38% above my sale price after I sold. That just made it worse. 

I had the right idea, the right stock, and the stock climbed as I expected. 
But the stop-loss order took me out of the trade too soon. 


¢ Lesson: I wonder if the stop was placed properly. I didn’t find an expla- 
nation of why I raised the stop two days after I bought, even as price 
dropped during those two days (forming a shark-32 pattern: a 3-day 
pattern with lower highs and higher lows). 


Vertex Pharmaceuticals 


A similar situation occurred in Vertex Pharmaceuticals (VRTX). According to 
my notebook, I bought in late into a triple bottom. However, looking at the 
chart shows that the triple bottom didn’t break out (confirm) before I bought. 

Anyway, the stock dropped far enough to hit my stop, handing me a 9% 
loss. The stock climbed 17% and then dropped 28% before making a 419% 
rise. If I had waited for confirmation before buying, I would have participated 
in that huge rise. 


Cemex 


Cemex (CX) in late 2007 showed a different scenario. The stock formed a 
triple bottom, which confirmed as a valid pattern. Price broke out upward, 
soared, and within a few weeks had returned to the breakout price in a classic 
throwback. That’s when I bought. 

Here’s my notebook: “27 October 2007.’ This appears to be making a tri- 
ple bottom, so I am going to buy at market open on Monday. The others in the 
industry are showing strength. [The company] said they will try to raise prices 
next year but noted the US housing market is weak and that’s hurting profits 


1054 Triple Bottoms 


and revenues. They also see the weakness as ‘temporary.’ If this drops below 
the triple bottom low, then it’s exit time: 28.23 for a 7% loss. This sounds like 
a losing situation to me. Profits and revenues will fall in the coming quarters, 
but the stock is cheap, historically. Hope it doesn’t become cheaper.” 

Because of my fear of a losing trade, I cut the trade size by 29%. 

I bought on the day price peaked. It dropped thereafter, dropping below 
the bottom of the triple bottom and hitting the stop. “Date sold: 5 November 
2007. Order details: I placed a stop order to sell it at 27.99, a penny below the 
prior day’s low, but it filled at 27.89. Strong downdraft on the open. Sell rea- 
son: hit stop.” I lost 9% on the trade and feel glad that I cut the position size. 


¢ Lesson: Trying to determine when a throwback has completed and 
price resumes rising can be difficult. Price did look as if it was rising 
(it had bottomed 4 days prior) when I bought, but it reversed. In fact, 
my buy price was a few cents above the triple bottom’s high, so it was 
like breaking out upward for a second time. 


I was happy I sold because the bear market took the stock down to 4.01, 
or 86% below my sale price. 


Sara Lee 


In Sara Lee (SLE) in early 2006, I spotted a triple bottom in the making. 
The stock had been trending downward since peaking in January 2005. 
Now (2020), I avoid trying to catch a falling knife (bottom fishing) in issues 
that drop for long periods of time like this one did for a year. 

“Buy reason: Flat shelf on triple bottom, between 2nd and 3rd bottom. 
Price has closed above the shelf top. I wanted to place a buy stop to get in 
a penny above the shelf, but I forgot to yesterday. Today, price zoomed up. 
Oops. You can also consider this an AEDB [Adam & Eve double bottom], con- 
firmed today.” 

What this means is that I bought (at 18.00) near the third bottom and did 
not wait for confirmation of the triple bottom. I placed a stop and raised it to 
17.66 on 17 March. 

On 29 March, I sold. “Sell reason: Price broke out downward from a 
congestion region, so I think it will continue lower. This morning, the futures 
market has rallied, and they say the US markets will also open up strongly, in 
part as a snapback rally from yesterday’s Fed [Federal Reserve] interest rate 
rise and overreaction in the Dow [industrials] (a selloff). 

“The stock started to rally yesterday just after 3:00 p.m. EST, and my 
guess is the rise will continue into today’s open. If that’s true, then I have a 
5 cent trailing stop ready to be executed. If not, then the stock should bottom 
in 30 minutes to 1 hour into the trading [session], and then Ill place the trailing 


Sample Trade 1055 


stop, ride price up, and exit rich! Okay, maybe not, but for a small loss anyway. 
This stock didn’t behave as I expected, so it’s time to get out.” 

I sold at 17.83 and took a 1% loss. The stock went down a bit, up a bit, 
and then continued lower where it dropped 14% in one session. 

In Forest Oil Corp (FST) and Rohm and Haas (ROH), Ialso bought before 
confirmation and suffered the consequences when the triangle didn’t confirm. 


¢ Lesson: If I had waited for confirmation, I would have never entered 
this trade (SLE) because the triple bottom never confirmed. 
¢ Lesson: Ifa trade doesn’t work as expected, then get out. 


Sample Trade 


Russell is an engineer working in the telecommunications industry. He once 
said that the half-life of an engineer’s knowledge is 10 years. “After twenty 
years, there’s nothing left! That’s when it’s time to hide from management.” 
Before his time comes, he hopes to have a nest egg of funds accumulated from 
investing in stocks with which he is familiar. 

He is a player, a position trader who might be in a stock for a week or two, 
while at other times he takes a longer view. Occasionally, his positions last for 
years; these are the most profitable. 

He had a buy stop in place a penny at the top of the triple bottom shown 
in Figure 67.4. I show the triple bottom as ABC. The top of the pattern is at 
D, and he bought into the stock at E, at 28.55. 


ArcBest Corp (ARCB) 


al 


18 Feb Mar Apr May = Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov DecJan19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 67.4 Russell had high hopes for this triple bottom trade, but the stock 
couldn’t penetrate overhead resistance. 


1056 Triple Bottoms 


“I placed a stop below the lowest of the three bottoms” (the first one), at 
24.67, for a potential loss of 14%. “The potential loss was higher than I like, 
but...” he said and shrugged. 

He wanted to hold this for the longer term but noted overhead resistance 
(line F) set up by a triple bottom in early 2018 (turns GHI). Notice how GHI 
might be a head-and-shoulders bottom except H and J are too close in price 
to one another. 

The stock gapped up a day after he bought, and he was thrilled, but it 
lasted only a day before price started retracing. 

The retrace continued but didn’t take the stock down much before it 
resumed rising to peak at J. When the stock reached J and left a defined peak 
on the chart, he raised his stop to just below the minor low at M. That nar- 
rowed his potential loss considerably, to less than 3% (unless price gapped 
down, of course). 

A double top appeared at JK, which confirmed in a strong push lower. 
Combined with overhead resistance (F) that he noted before he bought, 
Russell decided to sell. “It’s not going to be able to push through it [resistance] 
this time,” he told me. 

He placed an order to sell at the open (L) and received a fill of 29.00. 
He made 1.5% on the trade. 

The stock recovered to 32 as the chart shows, but then Covid-19 came 
along and sent the stock to the hospital where it reached a low of 13.54, a drop 
of 53% below his sale price. 


68 


Triple Tops 


TT TT TT 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Price trends upward and builds three distinct minor highs at about the 
same price level with price breaking out downward. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term bearish 
bearish reversal reversal 
Performance rank 24 out of 36 10 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 25% 8% 
Average decline 14% 22% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 66% 66% 
Percentage meeting 49% 53% 
price target 
See also Broadening formations, right-angled and descending; 


broadening tops; broadening wedges, descending; 
head-and-shoulders tops; head-and-shoulders tops, 
complex; triangles, ascending; three falling peaks 


‘Triple tops remind me of some mountains in New Mexico or the drumlins in 
upstate New York. A mountain or hill soars above a flat plain. They look odd 


1057 


1058 ‘Triple Tops 


because they stand alone. I love those mountains, but triple tops are another 
matter. As bearish patterns, they predict a price downturn, and that is never a 
good omen for traders owning a stock. 

The performance rank is mid-list in bear markets and worse in bull 
markets. In bear markets, the failure rate is low, 8% (ranking eighth where 
1 is best), and that’s terrific. In bull markets, failures are three times higher. 
Ouch. 1 understand that bull markets try to push price up and bearish patterns 
will struggle to perform under those conditions. The results suggest that you 
should trade triple tops only in bear markets, and even then you may need to 
hold your nose (and your wallet or purse). 

Let’s look at triple tops so we can better understand this pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 68.1 shows a triple top on the daily scale. The pattern reminds me of a 
rollercoaster as price climbs the first hill. Then it is over the top to glide down 
the slope and up to the next high and over the third one as well. After the final 
peak, price declines for the intermediate term, pausing at the confirmation line 
while deciding which route to take. 

Price pulls back to the triple top confirmation line, and begins creating a 
new chart pattern, a head-and-shoulders top. Price closing below the neckline 
seals the fate of the stock. Price tumbles in a straight-line fashion until reach- 
ing a low of 37, a decline from the triple top high of 50. 


Tenneco Inc (Auto Parts (Replacement), NYSE, TEN) 

-51 

—, Top Third Top = 56 

t I, ee 

I -48 

jl ull -47 
t Mi hu, 


i Left Head Right _46 
ng I" iL 


First ‘ 


afl 
wi mh 
i” 


uh li 


-45 


| i UT 
by Neckline Be 


\ 40 


| 
i i 


Ma 


Confirmation Line | 
h i 


May 94 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 68.1 A triple top has three peaks and a pullback usually follows. A head- 
and-shoulders top forms at the confirmation point, signaling further weakness. 


Identification Guidelines 1059 


The three peaks of the triple top form at about 50 and have two valleys 
between them. The lower of the two valleys marks the confirmation point, the 
level to which price must decline (close below) to confirm the validity of the 
chart pattern. After confirmation, price usually pulls back to the confirmation 
price before continuing lower. 

Notice how the second top in this triple top is below the other two but 
the head-and-shoulders top has a head above the adjacent peaks. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 68.1 outlines identification guidelines for triple tops. 

‘To see another example of what a triple top looks like, study Figure 68.2. 
The three tops are pointed, well separated, and distinct in this example. The 
three minor highs are obvious, and that is important in any chart pattern. 
If other investors do not recognize a chart pattern for what it is, they will not 
try to take advantage of it. If they do not buy or sell appropriately, the pattern 
will fail. Chart patterns are a self-fulfilling prophecy that depend on the crowd 
behaving the same way. 

All three peaks top out at about the same price with the center peak a bit 
recessed from the other two. This feature is common as quite a number (25%) 
of triple tops have a lower center peak. 


Table 68.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance After price trends upward, look for three minor highs, well separated 


and distinct, followed by price closing below the bottom of the 
chart pattern. 


Price trend Price should rise up to the triple top. The rise need not be long or 
steep, but the triple top should have something to reverse. 


Same price The price variation among the three tops is minor. The center top 
should not be significantly above the other two, otherwise it is a 
head-and-shoulders top. There is a tendency for smaller triple tops 
to be one of the broadening family of chart patterns, especially the 
right-angled variety, so pay attention to the price lows, too. 


Volume The volume trend is usually downward but may be hard to read. 
Often the volume pattern is flat except near each of the three 
peaks. The first peak often has the highest volume. Do not discard a 
triple top because of an unusual volume trend. 


Breakout direction, Price must close below the lowest low between the three tops (the 
confirmation confirmation point) or it is not a triple top. An up-sloping trendline 
drawn connecting the valley lows can also serve as confirmation 
when price closes below it. 


1060 ‘Triple Tops 


Georgia Pacific Corp (Paper & Forest Products, NYSE, GP) 


First To Third T = 
cs Second Top il oP a 
- 69 


| | 
| | | hy HP 67 
| 


uo tt 
} | Ma jn ' i Li] Mit Pullback 
"NH A | | | 


jut! 


| | 
i! 
mul 


Jan 92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 68.2 This triple top shows three distinct widely spaced tops at nearly the 
same price level. 


The receding volume trend is clear in the figure with the first peak wit- 
nessing the highest volume of the three. 

An interesting development in this chart pattern is a trendline drawn 
below the lows (not shown but it connects points A and B on the chart). With 
another trendline drawn horizontally across the three tops, the pattern takes 
on the appearance of a right-angled descending broadening top. 

In many triple tops, the broadening formation also appears. This occur- 
rence does not diminish the validity of the triple top; it just makes both for- 
mations easier to trade (because you can buy or sell at the trendlines and take 
advantage of partial rises or declines). 

Appearance. When searching for a triple top or verifying that the three 
bumps on a price chart belong to the pattern, look at the high price of each 
peak. They should be priced near one another. A center peak that towers above 
the other two suggests the pattern is a head-and-shoulders top. When the tops 
consistently inch upward, the activity suggests a broadening top. Three con- 
secutively lower peaks could be a three falling peaks pattern. 

While looking at the three peaks, do not ignore the lows. The formation 
may be a right-angled descending broadening top or even a descending broad- 
ening wedge if the three peaks are moving down slightly in price. 

In the case of a right-angled broadening top, you can probably make 
money on the triple top pattern even before the broadening top breaks out. 
At least with a broadening formation, you can anticipate when it will be time to 
close out your position (do so when price approaches the lower, down-sloping, 
trendline). 


Identification Guidelines 1061 


Price trend. Price should trend upward into a triple top so that the pat- 
tern acts as a reversal of the upward trend. In some cases, price drops into a 
triple top and the pattern acts as a continuation pattern. Those do occur, but 
are rare. In the future, I may study them separately, but this edition has them 
all lumped together. 

Same price. Make sure the three well-separated peaks are not part of the 
same congestion pattern. Each top should be a part of its own minor high, a 
distinct peak that towers above the surrounding price landscape. The price dif- 
ference between the three peaks is usually minor. A large price variation should 
exclude the pattern from consideration, but be flexible. 

Volume. The overall volume trend is usually downward and lackluster, 
but varies from pattern to pattern. Volume on the three peaks, especially the 
first one, is higher than in the valleys. Do not discard a triple top because vol- 
ume doesn’t conform to the standard pattern. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. The three-bump pattern confirms 
as a triple top when price closes below the lowest low in the pattern. Without 
confirmation, you do not have a triple top. 

Alternatively, an up-sloping trendline drawn across the bottoms of the 
two valleys can also serve as confirmation when price closes below it. Often, 
this approach will allow you to enter a trade sooner and at a better price. 

Figure 68.3 shows an example of a triple top on the weekly scale. Even 
though the average triple top sports a 14% (bull market) to 22% (bear market) 
decline after the breakout, price occasionally falls much farther. 


Bombay Co, Inc (Retail Lines, NYSE, BBA) 


. Second ‘i -35 
First Top _ third Top 


-29 
-27 
Confirmation Line -25 


| i = 
ye 1 | -17 
ah il ae 


"e My 1 


9 


; pa 
a 
el 


fhe 7 
u = 5 
3 
92 FMAM JJ] ASOND93FMAMJJASONDI4 FMAM] JAS OND 


Figure 68.3 Triple top reversal on the weekly scale. The triple top marks the high 
point for the stock. 


1062 ‘Triple Tops 


As you can see in the chart, the triple top marks the peak in the stock. 
From the high of 32.94, the stock plummets to 4.75, a stomach-churning 
decline of 86% in 2 years. 

The chart also suggests some lessons. Sometimes the buy-and-hold strat- 
egy does not work. Whether you sold a bit early or a bit late, anything would 
have been better than riding the stock all the way up and all the way back down. 

Do not laugh; I have done it myself, but not with this stock. It is prob- 
ably a mistake we all have made at one time or another and hope never to 
make again. Unless you use stops, you will probably make it again (and even 
then you can face surprises when price gaps open 67% lower). You will watch 
all your profits evaporate as a stock declines while you continue hoping it will 
turn around. Then, just after you get disgusted enough to sell, price bottoms 
and starts recovering. 


Focus on Failures 


The failure rate of triple tops is high in bull markets (25%) but much lower 
in bear markets (8%). A triple top fails when price breaks out downward and 
drops no more than 5% before turning around and heading meaningfully 
higher. This is a key point. Price must decline to the confirmation price, the 
lowest low reached in the pattern. If price does not decline to that price, then 
the three-bump pattern is not a triple top—it is just a collection of minor highs 
(or, perhaps, some other chart pattern). 


Smith International (Oilfield Svcs/Equipment, NYSE, SII) 


— 33 
i i 3 
r, ri Ml i fie 30 


i 28 
le" -27 


| 
jet -25 
sa tg Third Top i -24 


ie Ih 
f a : ral i" ! in I H | A 
lh Confirmation Level ao 


First Top 


yy 


Nov 95 Dec Jan 96 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 68.4 This is an example of a 5% failure where price fails to continue 
moving down by more than 5% before turning around. Strong industry trends 
were instrumental in turning around the stock. 


Statistics 1063 


Figure 68.4 shows a typical example of a 5% failure. The three tops are 
distinct minor highs that form after a 2-month spurt upward. It is not surpris- 
ing that the stock needs a rest and decides to retrace some of its gains—a com- 
mon occurrence. That sideways move forms the triple top. 

The February valley is the lowest one in the pattern at 20.25. Price closes 
below that in March at 19.88, staging a downward breakout (although it’s hard 
to see in the figure). Price confirms that this pattern is a valid triple top. 

Had you sold this stock short at the confirmation point of 20.25, you 
should have covered your trade once price climbed above the highest high in 
the pattern, in this case, 23.88. This tactic would have kept losses to a rather 
large 18%, but that is certainly better than hoping for a decline while watching 
it rise to 33! 

Sometimes, it is difficult to determine exactly why a stock fails to perform 
as expected. Often fundamentals are the key. In this case, the oil-field ser- 
vices sector was improving due to an increase in exploration activity and deep 
water drilling. In late January, the Federal Reserve cut two key interest rates 
by 0.25% giving hope that the stimulus would boost the health of the overall 
economy (or warning of future difficulty, hence the need to cut rates). 

On the technical front, if you draw trendlines along the three tops and 
the minor lows, the pattern takes on the appearance of a descending broad- 
ening wedge since the three tops are at consecutively lower prices. With the 
wedge, it is difficult to predict in which direction the breakout will occur. 
The formation serves as a resting place for the stock as it gathers strength for 
the next up leg. 

One could view the pattern as the corrective phase of a measured move 
up formation. The price prediction of the measured move fulfills quickly when 
price climbs to 28.88 in late April. 


Statistics 


Table 68.2 shows general statistics for triple tops. 


Table 68.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 1,964 677 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 100% R 100% R 
Average decline -14% -22% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change -3% -11% 
Days to ultimate low 56 40 


How many change trend? 26% 49% 


1064 Triple Tops 


Number found. I found 2,641 patterns in 828 stocks with the first one 
appearing in July 1991 and the most recent in May 2019. Notall stocks covered 
the entire period, and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. By definition, a triple top 
reverses the upward price trend when it breaks out downward. Although continu- 
ation patterns do happen from time to time, I didn’t separate them from reversals. 

Average decline. The average decline of triple tops in bear markets is 
22%, considerably more than the 14% decline in bull markets. Because triple 
tops are bearish chart patterns, it makes sense that they would perform better 
in bear markets than in bullish ones. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. If you compare the average decline 
(14%, 22%) with the market decline (3%, 11%), you can see the market influ- 
ence on triple top performance. Bear markets help stocks decline. This finding 
suggests that you short a stock in bear markets or sell a long holding before 
the cleaners find you. 

Days to ultimate low. In bull markets, it takes about 2 months to reach 
the ultimate low and about 1.5 months in bear markets. Comparing the aver- 
age decline in both markets by how long it takes to get there, we find that price 
drops 2.2 times as fast in bear markets as in bull ones. 

This finding emphasizes the need for stops. Without a stop, if you are not 
careful, your loss can grow to huge proportions quickly, especially in bear markets. 

How many change trend? This row counts how many triple tops see 
price drop more than 20% after a downward breakout. The higher the per- 
centage, the easier it might be to make money trading the chart pattern. That’s 
my theory anyway. 

The bull market is slightly below the average for other chart pattern 
types, but the bear market is spot on. 

Table 68.3 shows failure rates for triple tops. Clearly, the bear market 
numbers show fewer failures than the bull market. For example, 8% of the 
triple tops I looked at in bear markets failed to decline more than 5%. Half, 
51%, failed to drop more than 20%. 


Table 68.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 496 or 25% 52 or 8% 
10 442 or 48% 77 or 19% 


15 298 or 63% 110 or 35% 
20 215 or 74% 104 or 51% 
25 151 or 82% 89 or 64% 
30 122 or 88% 63 or 73% 
35 89 or 92% 63 or 82% 
50 121 or 98% 88 or 95% 
75 29 or 100% 31 or 100% 
Over 75 1 or 100% 0 or 100% 


Statistics 1065 


In bull markets, the result is even worse with 74% failing to drop more 
than 20%. 

The table says the odds do not favor the stock making a large decline. 
For example, suppose the measure rule gives a target of 35 in a $50 stock. 
That’s a 30% drop. The table says that 73% to 88% of the stocks will fail to 
drop that far. 

Table 68.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. Triple tops have downward breakouts only. If price 
closes above the top of the pattern before breaking out downward, then it’s not 
a valid triple top. 

Yearly position, performance. The best performance comes from 
triple tops with breakouts near the yearly low. Avoid those near the yearly 
high. It’s reassuring (meaning the trend is consistent) to see that the fur- 
ther away from the yearly low you go, the worse the performance in both 
markets. 

Pullbacks. Pullbacks occur two-thirds of the time, and it takes price 
12 days on average to return to the breakout price. 

When a pullback occurs, performance suffers. For example, in bear 
markets price declines 21% after the breakout when a pullback is present. 
Without a pullback, the decline measures 25%. If you can select a triple top 
that does not have a pullback, then good for you! Looking for nearby (within 
6% to 10% below the breakout price) underlying support where price might 
reverse may help. 

After a pullback completes, the stock resumes dropping 57% of the time. 
That also means 43% of the time the stock finds the ultimate low as price 
drops before pulling back. 


Table 68.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 

Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-17%, M-15%, L-24%, M -22%, 

12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H-13% H -21% 
Pullback occurrence 66% 66% 
Average time to pullback bottoms -6% in 6 days -10% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 12 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -14% -21% 
Average decline for patterns -16% -25% 

without pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 57% 57% 
Performance with breakout day gap -15% -22% 
Performance without breakout day gap -14% -22% 


Average gap size $0.86 $1.12 


1066 Triple Tops 


Gaps. Gaps that appear during the breakout from a triple top don’t cause 
the stock to drop much farther than those without gaps. 

Table 68.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones in both bull and 
bear markets. I applaud their consistency. 

‘To use this finding, measure the height of the triple top from tallest peak 
to lowest valley between the three peaks and divide by the price of the lowest 
valley. If the result is larger than the median shown in the table, then you have 
a tall pattern. 

Width. Width isn’t a good predictor of future performance, at least not as 
good as height. Wide patterns perform better in bull markets. I use the median 
width to separate wide patterns from narrow ones. 

Height and width combinations. Patterns that are both tall and wide 
outperform the other combinations (most of the time, anyway). Avoid short pat- 
terns, either wide or narrow, because they perform worst. See the table for details. 

Table 68.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume. Volume trends downward 60% or more of the time in triple 
tops, on average. As I mentioned before, don’t discard a pattern if it shows 
volume increasing. Why? Because the table says there’s almost no performance 
difference for triple tops with rising and falling volume, heavy or light breakout 
day volume. 


Table 68.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -17% -24% 
Short pattern performance -12% -21% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 9.7% 16.9% 
Narrow pattern performance -13% -22% 
Wide pattern performance -15% -22% 
Median width 38 days 43 days 
Short and narrow performance -12% -21% 
Short and wide performance -12% -20% 
Tall and wide performance -17% -23% 


Tall and narrow performance -17% -21% 


Statistics 1067 


Table 68.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 62% down 60% down 
Rising volume trend performance -14% -22% 

Falling volume trend performance -15% -22% 

Heavy breakout volume performance -15% -22% 

Light breakout volume performance -14% -22% 


Does that surprise you? If you read some technical analysis texts on the 
subject, they’ll often write something like, “If breakout volume doesn’t spike, 
then don’t trade the pattern.” Table 68.6 says it doesn’t matter for triple tops 
(but it might for other chart patterns). 

Table 68.7 shows how often price reaches a stop location. I checked 
triple tops to see where the best place to stick a stop-loss order was. If you 
place it at the top of the pattern, it will rarely be hit as price drops to the 
ultimate low. Hide it at the bottom of the pattern and you'll likely be 
stopped out. 

I knew a novice trader who placed his stops a few cents away from the 
current price. He continued to be stopped out within a few days, taking a small 
loss each time. He couldn’t face the idea of risking more money by moving his 
stop farther away. 

Don’t be like him. Place your stops at a reasonable distance from the 
current price. Then convert the potential loss into a percentage of the current 
price and see if you need to adjust the stop location according to your toler- 
ance for loss. 

Sometimes, a stock is so volatile that you’ll want to keep the stop farther 
away. A volatility stop may assist in determining the best location. Visit the 
Glossary for details and tell them Tom sent you. 


Table 68.7 
How Often Stops Hit 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Pattern top 2% 1% 
Middle 17% 10% 


Pattern bottom 72% 69% 


1068 _ Triple Tops 


Table 68.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 

Description Bull Market 

1990s -17% 

2000s -13% 

2010s -14% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 16% 

2000s 30% 

2010s 27% 


Table 68.8 shows the performance over three decades. I don’t include 
bear markets because they happened only in the 2000s. 

Performance over time. The 1990s showed the best performance, but 
returns have leveled off in the most recent two decades. 

Failures over time. Failures were worst in the 2000s and best in the 
1990s. The 1990s had the fewest samples, though (71). The other two decades 
had two or three times as many samples. I’m just throwing that out to see if it 
sticks. It might explain the differences. 

Table 68.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. Triple tops bust a lot in bull markets (almost 
half will bust). Notice that only 14% bust in bear markets. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted busted patterns by how often they 
busted. Single busts occur most often, as one might expect, but triple+ 
(more than two busts) place second. We’ve seen this happen in other chart 
patterns, too. Figure 68.5 shows a triple+ busted pattern. Price turns like 
a corkscrew. 


Table 68.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 848 or 43% 97 or 14% 
Single bust count 566 or 67% 64 or 66% 
Double bust count 23 or 3% 5 or 5% 
Triple+ bust count 259 or 31% 28 or 29% 
Performance for all busted patterns 42% 34% 
Single busted performance 60% 48% 


Non-busted performance (triple bottoms) 46% 27% 


Trading Tactics 1069 


Honeywell International Inc (HON) 


43 
07 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan08 Feb 


Figure 68.5 A trade in a busted triple top didn’t work as well as planned. 


Busted and non-busted performance. | use triple bottoms as proxies for 
non-busted triple tops. I wanted to compare how busted patterns perform with 
their non-busted counterparts. 

The best performance happens after trading single busted triple tops. 
How do you know it will single bust and not triple+ bust? The answer is you 
don’t except to say that two out of three busted patterns will be single busts. 
So the probabilities are on your side. 

Perhaps you should focus on the 60% average rise for single busted pat- 
terns in bull markets. That should be an incentive to consider trading triple 
tops. As dreadful as the performance of a non-busted triple top is, it does have 
value (when it busts). 

Do your homework on the company, and when price closes above the top 
of the highest peak, consider buying the stock and enjoying the ride upward. 
Just remember anything can happen along the way to the ultimate high. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 68.10 shows trading tactics. Before you consider trading a triple top, 
ask yourself, why would you want to? The failure rates shown in Table 68.3 are 
huge. Price typically won’t drop far after a breakout. There are exceptions, of 
course, so you can’t just ignore the bearish implications of the triple top. But 
if selling a long-term buy-and-hold position because you fear a large decline, 
remember the taxman will have his hand out, waiting for his share. Even if the 
stock drops, it'll likely recover, given enough time. 


1070 Triple Tops 


Table 68.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule Compute the pattern’s height by subtracting the lowest low from the 
highest high in the triple top. Subtract the height from the lowest 
low. The result is the target price. The bottom portion of the table 
shows how often price reaches the target. 


Wait for Since price after most three-top patterns continues rising, always wait 
confirmation for price to break out downward before selling or shorting. 

Trade the Draw a trendline connecting the two valleys. If the line slopes upward, 
trendline the pattern confirms when price closes below the line. Trade after 


pattern confirmation. 


Wait for pullback The majority of triple tops have pullbacks, so if you miss the breakout, 
place or add to your short position once price begins heading back 
down after the pullback. 


Stop location Table 68.7 can help with stop location. 


Busted trade Consider trading a busted triple top in bull markets. 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 72% 78% 
Percentage reaching full height target 49% 53% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 24% 23% 
Percentage reaching 3x height 13% 12% 


Measure rule, targets. Use the measure rule to help pick a target to help 
determine how far down the stock might drop. 

Begin with computing the height of the triple top by subtracting the low- 
est low from the highest high reached in the chart pattern. Subtract the height 
from the lowest low to give you a target price. 

Figure 68.6 makes the computation clearer. The lowest low of the triple 
top occurs in late December when price touches 17.75 briefly. The third peak 
harbors the highest high, 23.38. The difference, 5.63, is the height. Subtract 
the height from the lowest low to arrive at a target price of 12.12 (that is, 
17.75 — 5.63). The figure shows price reaching the target in mid-June. 

‘To better gauge the veracity of the result, you might look at the predicted 
decline in percentage terms. From the confirmation point (the lowest low) of 
17.75, a 5.63-point decline is a loss of 32%. Table 68.3 indicates that less than 
12% of triple tops in bull markets have losses more than 30%. Those are ter- 
rible odds. 

In such a situation, and in most cases, you should look for support lev- 
els. Price indicates support when it declines to a level and then rebounds. 
For example, the stock paused at $16 during July and August 1991 (not shown 
in Figure 68.6). This pause showed support where the stock again paused 


Experience 1071 


during April (shown). Eventually, the stock worked through the support and 
tumbled to a lower support level. 

The lower portion of Table 68.10 shows how often price reaches a target. 
In bull markets, for example, using the full height like we did in our example, 
the stock will reach or exceed the target 49% of the time. 

For a closer target, cut the height in half and subtract it from the break- 
out price. That will boost the success rate to 72%. 

Wait for confirmation. In a roaring bull market, triple tops are often 
deceiving. Three price bumps appear, and price does not decline to the confir- 
mation price before soaring. Thus, an important guideline in using triple tops 
is to wait for price to close below the confirmation price. 

What is the confirmation price? It’s the price of the lowest low between 
the three peaks. It’s also called the breakout price. 

Trade the trendline. Draw a trendline connecting the two valleys 
between the three tops in a triple top. If this trendline slopes upward, a trade 
signals when price closes below it. This method will often get you in sooner 
than waiting for price to close below the lowest low. Ignore the method for 
down-sloping trendlines (because price may never close below the trendline). 

Wait for pullback. Pullbacks occur 66% of the time (Table 68.4), so 
if you miss the original breakout, you can often place your trade during the 
pullback. Figure 68.6 shows a quick pullback occurring just 2 days after the 
breakout. Just over a month later (B), investors had another opportunity to add 
to their positions before the decline resumed. 

Stop location. Should the trade go against you, place a stop-loss order 
10 or 15 cents above the nearest high. Since the three tops establish a resist- 
ance area, price will not hit the stop order until the resistance burns through. 
Sometimes a fourth peak will appear before price moves down. 

Table 68.7 gives the probabilities of a stock rising to various locations 
during its journey to the ultimate low. If you hold onto the stock past the ulti- 
mate low, then ignore the table. It doesn’t apply. 

Once you have a stop location in mind, then do convert the potential loss 
into a percentage of the current price to determine how loud you should yell 
if the stop triggers. 

Busted trade. Single busted triple tops in bull markets can lead to huge 
gains, at least that’s what the numbers suggest in Table 68.9. If you want to 
make money trading triple tops, stick to those which bust in bull markets. 


Experience 


I couldn’t recall ever trading a triple top. It’s a bearish pattern, and I have no 
desire to short a pattern with such poor performance. However, perhaps in the 
early days of my trading career, I may have been scared out of a long position 
or two by storm clouds forming a triple top. 


1072 ‘Triple Tops 


Hartford Financial Services Group Inc. 


A check of my spreadsheet of trades surprised me. I found two trades, both in 
the same stock, sold on the same day, but bought at different times. The stock 
was Hartford Financial Services Group Inc. (HIG) in late 2009, after the bear 
market ended. I won’t go into the two buys except to say that one remark in 
my trading notebook caught my eye: “Hold this until it hits 60 to 80 or more.” 
The stock was trading at about $25 a share at the time. Wishful thinking? Was 
I dreaming? 

The stock did reach 60 for the first time in 2019, which was 10 years later. 
That’s a long time to hold onto a stock, waiting for it to more than double. 

The stock formed a long triple top (6 months wide) and broke out down- 
ward from it. From my notebook: “Sell reason: triple top confirmed. On the 
weekly chart, this has dropped below 2 or 3 peaks since Sept 2009, so it’s time 
to bail out, especially since I am predicting a bear market. It’s time to get out 
of insurance company stocks. This could drop back to 10.” 

The market just exited from a bear market in March, and I was predicting 
a second one. Really? Maybe I meant a bear market in the stock and not the 
general market. 

Anyway, I sold my holdings and took a loss of 4% and 10% on the two 
trades but collected a few dividends along the way. The stock continued down 
to 18.81, nowhere near 10, but it bottomed 13% below the breakout price. 

The stock climbed back up to the top of the triple top (31.08), and then 
dropped all the way down to 14.56. 

If I’d held on, the loss to 18.81 would have meant a 23% decline. Yes, the 
stock almost doubled after that with a rise to 31, but you don’t want to build 
bad habits by discarding your trading plan. 


¢ Lesson: Don’t build bad habits by discarding your trading plan. Plan 
the trade and trade the plan. 


Honeywell International 


The real surprise from looking at my spreadsheet of trades was that I traded 
busted triple tops three times. Let me tell you about one I made using 
Honeywell International (HON) stock in 2007, which I show in Figure 68.5. 

The triple top is at ABC, which confirmed as a valid triple top at D when 
price closed below the bottom of the pattern. The stock reversed quickly and 
closed above the top of the triple top on the price bar to the right of E. I bought 
the next day and received a fill at 60.09, just above the day’s low. I was trying to 
trade the busted triple top. 

The stock moved higher after my buy and that’s often a good sign of a 
successful trade. A diamond top appeared within a week or two, but I didn’t 


Sample Trade 1073 


notice the pattern until now. Yes, the diamond top looks weird, but that’s typical 
of diamond patterns. 

On July 17, I thought I had placed a stop but didn’t, so I put a volatility 
stop at 58.60. The volatility stop takes the stock’s volatility into account before 
telling you where the stop should be located. 

On July 26, the Dow industrials dropped 311 points and sucked the stock 
down with it, snagging my stop-loss order. The stock sold at 58.60, and I lost 
3% on the trade. 

The stock busted the downward breakout, then busted the upward one 
and continued to bust the triple top at least 6 times on this chart. In June 2008, 
the stock finally dropped out of its trading range and plunged, pulled down by 
the bear market and falling to 23.24, a drop of 60% below my sale price. Thank 
goodness I sold when I did. 


¢ Lesson: Even busted trades fail. 


Sample Trade 


Danielle is in charge of the family finances. To boost the return on their sav- 
ings, she has taken to playing the stock market. Her first few trades were ten- 
tative but profitable. That gave her enough courage to undertake the trade 
featured in Figure 68.6. 


Mac Frugals (Retail Store, NYSE, MFI) 


Second Stock Sold Short 24 
First Top Top Third Top a 


ed i alt ti § My 4 ‘a “2 
if - r try 7 


<2 Vth 


-18 
ey 
Unconfirmed -16 
Double Bottom Support and i 15 
Resistance Level , 

i i} | 
fe i i] \ -13 
Target Price _ ti] 12 


-11 
May fron -10 
"9 
- 8 
- 7 


Sep 91 Oct Nov Dec Jan92 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 68.6 Triple top with unconfirmed double bottom. As described in the 
Sample Trade, Danielle sold this stock before it reached the confirmation point and 
then panicked at the unconfirmed double bottom. The stock eventually declined 
56%. A descending scallop appears between points A and B. 


1074 ‘Triple Tops 


She is a brilliant, anxious, high-energy person who is comfortable taking 
more risk than most people, so it came as no surprise when she jumped the gun 
and sold the stock short in early January. She wanted to maximize her gains, 
and once prices were clearly heading down, she placed the trade and received 
a fill at 21.50. 

“The day after I sold short, the stock turned around and headed back up, 
making a fourth peak [it’s the second peak in the third top]. Gulp.” 

Instead of covering her loss, she decided to hang on. “I got lucky when 
price flipped around and headed back down.” Seven days later the stock reached 
the confirmation point of 17.75 but stalled. 

“It looked as though the triple top became a multiple top, which devel- 
oped into an unconfirmed double bottom. Very strange. As price climbed and 
my gains dwindled, I became a nervous wreck. Clearly shorting wasn’t for me. 
‘Too much risk. I was wringing my hands. I was pacing the floor. I couldn’t 
sleep. The good news is I lost 5 pounds because I couldn’t eat. Of course, my 
husband isn’t talking to me because I was a, wm, shrew let’s say. I did the smart 
thing and covered my position at 22.25. I suffered a loss of less than a point 
per share.” 

A week or so after she bailed out, the stock was lower and it kept mov- 
ing down. Eventually, the stock bottomed out at 9.38, comfortably below the 
predicted price and well below her entry point at 21.50. 

Danielle made several mistakes with this trade. First, she did not wait for 
price to confirm the triple top pattern. Had she waited, she would have seen 
the false double bottom (it never confirmed as a true double bottom because 
price did not close above the highest high between the two bottoms). 

Second, she was not patient enough for the trade to work out. When a 
trade goes against you, most times it is wise to quickly close out a position, 
especially if it is a short sale where losses can be unlimited. In this case, she 
wasn’t in the red by much at any time. 

Lastly, though, and it’s a big one: She didn’t have the experience to even 
think about shorting a stock. She got lucky to only lose a minor amount, espe- 
cially when she was using family money and not her own personal stash. 


69 


V-Bottoms 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: Looks like a V. Price makes a steep and long drop, then recovers. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bull- Short-term bullish 
ish reversal reversal 
Performance rank 24 out of 39 5 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 19% 14% 
Average rise 40% 32% 
Volume trend Upward Upward 
Throwbacks 55% 58% 
Percentage meeting 52% 42% 
price target 
See also V-bottom extended 


In the first edition of this book, I did not include V patterns because I couldn’t 
figure out how to trade them. In this edition, I was able to automate find- 
ing these patterns and solve the trading problem. We’ll look at identification 
guidelines shortly. 

The above Results Snapshot reveals that the average rise in bull mar- 
kets isn’t exciting (meaning it’s low), but this pattern does give traders the 
opportunity to ride price higher (to match the high on the left side of the V). 
Unfortunately, even that target is difficult to reach. 


1075 


1076 V-Bottoms 


However, in bear markets the performance rank places it fifth out of 20 
where a rank of 1 is best. So this chart pattern is an exceptionally good player in 
bear markets. I can imagine bear markets sending price down steeply followed 
by a snap recovery. 

Let’s see what a V-bottom pattern looks like. 


Tour 


Figure 69.1 shows a good example of a V-bottom that works as one would 
hope. Price starts its steep plunge at A. The drop is extensive on a percent- 
age basis, and price makes its way down to B, where it bottoms. A few days 
after reaching B, the stock marches upward, posting higher highs and higher 
lows. 

The chart pattern reminds me of mountain climbers who fall into a cre- 
vasse. After hitting bottom, they gather their wits and start climbing out (or 
are pulled out), forming the right side of the pattern. Notice that they don’t 
slip much, meaning there are few or no retraces along the way. The climb out 
of the crevasse builds the right side of the V, which mirrors the left side. The 
climbers make it up to D, completing the V-bottom. 

Volume trends upward in this example and that’s typical. However, the 
percentages are almost random; 59% show volume trending higher from 
start to end of the pattern (meaning 41% have receding volume) in bull 
markets. 


Accelerate Diagnostics Inc (AXDX) 


mh oN 


Mi 
Vind 


18 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 69.1 This is a good example of a V-bottom that sees price climb. 


Identification Guidelines 1077 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 69.1 shows identification guidelines for the V-bottom pattern, and 
Figure 69.2 shows two of them, the first is at ABC and the second is at DEF. 
Appearance. The chart pattern looks like the letter V. The stock makes 
an unusually steep drop and turns on a dime to zip back up. If price can’t retrace 
at least 38.2% of the drop from the left-side high to the bottom of the pattern, 
then it’s not a V-bottom. That’s an arbitrary number, but it’s one I used to find 
these patterns. Price has to rise far enough that it suggests price will continue 
rising, and yet still be low enough to make buying the stock attractive. 
Plunge. Price makes an unusually steep and quick drop on the left side of 
the V that must be at least 15%. The average is 30%, so that’s the kind of drop 


Table 69.1 
Identification Guidelines 

Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Looks like a V. Price makes a steep and long drop, then recovers. 
Plunge Price drops at least 15%, but the average is higher: 30%. 
Volume Trends upward most of the time. 
Breakout direction, | Upward. A breakout occurs when price recovers at least 38.2% of 

confirmation the move down from the top of the pattern. If price doesn’t rise 

that far, then it’s not a valid V-bottom. 

Duration Patterns found are at least 3 weeks to 3 months long. 


Alkermes (ALKS) 


J | 4 rt im = 

hy a aple P 45 
Chae ae ae z 
if Hy 7 = 40 


- 
tt 


F tf 


18 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 69.2 These two V-bottoms appear in a downward trend. The left one fails 
to see price reach the top of the left side, but the right pattern does better when 
price reaches G. 


1078 V-Bottoms 


we’re looking for. The drop should be a straight-line run down (a little bend is 
fine) with few pauses along the way. 

Volume. Volume trends upward most of the time (I'll attach numbers 
to what “most of the time” means later), but the direction is almost random. 
In the figure, these two V-bottoms have a descending volume trend. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. By definition, the breakout is 
upward, and it occurs when price retraces 38.2% of the drop from A to B or D 
to E on the chart. 

If the stock doesn’t recover at least 38.2%, then it’s not a V-bottom. You'll 
see a lot of valid V-bottoms where the right side of the chart pattern never 
makes it up to the top of the left side. 

The ABC pattern is an example of this failure to retrace completely. Price 
at C falls short of the start, A. The DEF pattern does better. Point F almost 
makes it up to D, but it takes several more months to reach it at G. 

Duration. These patterns are short but plentiful. I limited the duration 
to a minimum of 3 weeks and a maximum of 3 months. If you see a V-bottom 
with a duration of less than 3 weeks, then use your best judgment. You'll find 
it rare that a V-bottom lasts longer than 2 months. Most are about a month 
long. 


Focus on Failures 
Figure 69.3 shows how the V-bottom fails to perform as expected. The start 
of the V is at A. Price begins a steep descent like an aircraft having a cabin 


pressurization problem. The drop is a straight-line run down to B with almost 


American Eagle Outfitters Inc (AEO) 


19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 69.3 This V-bottom fails to reach its potential. 


Statistics 1079 


no pauses along the way. The stock sees price plunge 30% from A (24.30) 
to the low at B (18.09). The duration of the pattern is just over a month 
(from A to C). 

After bottoming at B, the stock begins to recover. It climbs on opti- 
mism that the quarterly earnings will be exceptional. Instead, the company 
announces earnings at C that miss expectations, sending the airline crashing 
into the ground. The recovery to D never materializes, and the pattern fails to 
fulfill its potential. 

This chart is one of the reasons I usually don’t buy a stock within three 
weeks of an earnings announcement. It’s too dangerous. (And yes, I will hold a 
stock through an earnings announcement even as I cross my fingers.) 

The retrace of the AB drop by the BC rise is 39%, meeting the minimum 
requirement of 38.2% by a hair. The plunge from A to B is steep (more than 
15%) and short; the stock turns at B and heads back up. The volume trend 
(E) is upward in this example. All of that means the pattern qualifies as a valid 
V-bottom even if it didn’t work as expected. 


Statistics 


Table 69.2 shows general statistics for the V-bottom, so let’s discuss them. 
Because the breakout is always upward, there are no downward breakouts 
to report. 

Number found. I found V-bottoms as early as July 1991 and as recent as 
June 2019, but not all 969 stocks where I found the pattern covered the entire 
period and some no longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Most of the V-bottoms 
will act as reversals of the downward inbound trend (when price breaks out 
upward, reversing the downtrend). Continuations appear on the chart as a 
sharp retrace in a rising price trend. Price rises into the start of the chart 
pattern and leaves it moving upward, too. 


Table 69.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 
Reversal, continuation performance 


Average rise 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change 
Days to ultimate high 


How many change trend? 


1,997 

64% R, 36% C 
38% R, 41% C 
40% 

8% 

74 

53% 


1,678 

69% R, 31% C 
32% R, 32% C 
32% 

5% 

47 

50% 


1080 V-Bottoms 


Reversal/continuation performance. Upward breakouts in bull mar- 
kets show continuation patterns outperform reversals, but bear market results 
are split evenly. For the best performance, look for a V-bottom in an upward 
price trend. 

Average rise. As one would expect, the average rise in bull markets beat 
the performance in bear markets, even though V-bottoms in both have upward 
breakouts. This agrees with the old saw, trade with the trend. 

As low as the bear market value is, recall that it places fifth in perfor- 
mance when compared to other bear market chart patterns. I measured the 
average rise from the breakout price to the ultimate high (meaning I didn’t use 
the bottom of the V in the measure). 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The performance of the index can’t 
come close to the rise after the breakout from a V-bottom. I used the same hold- 
ing periods (from breakout to ultimate high) for both the stock and the index. 

Days to ultimate high. Price tops out quickly for this pattern. The aver- 
age is about 10 weeks in bull markets and about 6 weeks in bear markets. Thus, 
if you time it right, this pattern could be quite profitable for swing traders. It’s 
plentiful and price recovers quickly. 

How many change trend? This is a gauge of how many V-bottoms see 
price rise more than 20% from the breakout. The higher the number, the 
better because it suggests the move will be high enough to make a tidy profit. 
Both numbers are above 50%, which is what I like to see. 

Table 69.3 shows cumulative failure rates. For example, I found 377 or 
19% of V-bottoms failed to see price rise more than 5% (above the breakout) 
in bull markets. Almost half the patterns will fail to see price rise more than 
20% after the breakout. 

For this table, the lower the number, the better. You may find it easier to 
make money on patterns with low failure rates. Just remember that the results 


Table 69.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 377 or 19% 236 or 14% 
10 242 or 31% 234 or 28% 
15 168 or 39% 199 or 40% 
20 159 or 47% 168 or 50% 
25 145 or 55% 138 or 58% 
30 109 or 60% 118 or 65% 
35 83 or 64% 80 or 70% 
50 234 or 76% 199 or 82% 


75 197 or 86% 161 or 91% 
Over 75 283 or 100% 145 or 100% 


Table 69.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Statistics 1081 


Bear Market 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


100% up 
L 41%, M 38%, 
H 36% 


100% up 
L 33%, M 28%, 
H 31% 


Throwbacks occurrence 55% 58% 

Average time to throwback peaks 11% in 7 days 15% in 7 days 
Average time to throwback ends 13 days 13 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 35% 28% 

Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 45% 37% 
Percentage price resumes trend 53% 41% 
Performance with breakout day gap 45% 31% 
Performance without breakout day gap 38% 35% 

Average gap size $0.58 $0.53 


are for perfect trades, ones that buy when price hits the 38.2% retrace and sell 
at the ultimate high. The ultimate high is the highest peak before the uptrend 
ends. See the Glossary (“Ultimate high”) for details. 

Table 69.4 shows breakout and post-breakout statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, the breakout direction from a V-bottom 
is upward. If it doesn’t have an upward breakout, then it’s not a V-bottom. The 
breakout occurs when price retraces at least 38.2% of the drop from the top of 
the pattern to the bottom of the V. 

Yearly position, performance. I sorted the breakout price into where it 
occurs in the yearly high-low price range, then mapped performance on top 
of it. For both bull and bear markets, the best performing V-bottoms have the 
breakout price within a third of the yearly low. 

Bull markets have the worst performance if the breakout is near the yearly 
high. Bear market V-bottoms hate the middle third of the price range. 

Throwbacks. Throwbacks should be rare in this chart pattern if the 
V-bottom worked as we hoped. That is, price should not pause on the recovery 
back up to the top of the pattern. However, we do see a pause about half the 
time when a throwback occurs. 

Price climbs a substantial amount for a throwback, between 11% and 
15% in a week (a typical move in other chart pattern types is about 8%) before 
returning to the breakout price in 13 days (which is longer than normal by a 
day or two). 

As you might expect, V-bottoms without throwbacks outperform those 
that have them. That’s no surprise because other patterns behave the same 


1082 V-Bottoms 


way. The results suggest that throwbacks (and pullbacks for that matter) are 
not statistical glitches. 

Because the rise is hefty, 11% to 15%, you may wish to swing trade 
the throwback. Buy into the stock by setting a buy stop at the 38.2% retrace 
value and sell when the stock rises 10%. The median rise is 9%, by the way 
(bull market). 

Gaps. Breakout day gaps push the stock upward in bull markets, but 
retard performance in bear markets. Because I set the breakout at an arbitrary 
value (38.2% retrace of the downward plunge on the left side of the pattern), 
I don’t place much value in gaps for this pattern. 

Table 69.5 shows performance sorted by height and width. 

Height. Tall patterns outperform in both market conditions (bull, bear). 
The differences are startling. Choose a tall pattern in bull markets and you 
stand to make almost double what a short pattern will bring. That’s if you trade 
it perfectly and often enough; even so, it’s a huge difference. You can compute 
what the breakout price will be. Divide the pattern’s height by the breakout 
price. If the result is higher than the median shown in the table, then you have 
a tall pattern. However, just because your pattern is tall is no guarantee that it'll 
outperform, so keep that in mind. 

Width. In many types of chart patterns, wide patterns outperform short 
ones. Unfortunately, you won’t know when the pattern will end, so you won’t 
know ahead of time if the pattern is wide or narrow. However, if the move from 
the top of the pattern (the start) to the breakout is longer than the median 
width listed in the table, then you have a wide pattern. That’s how I measured 
width (from pattern top to breakout). 


Table 69.5 
Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 50% 39% 
Short pattern performance 29% 25% 
Median height as a percentage 34.0% 41.3% 


of breakout price 


Narrow pattern performance 36% 28% 
Wide pattern performance 43% 37% 
Median width 28 days 26 days 
Short and narrow performance 29% 22% 
Short and wide performance 29% 28% 
Tall and wide performance 55% 46% 


Tall and narrow performance 45% 33% 


Statistics 1083 


Height and width combinations. Because we know that tall patterns 
outperform and wide patterns outperform, we’d expect the combination of 
tall and wide to show the best performance. Indeed, it does. Short and narrow 
patterns (the opposite of tall and wide) have the worst performance. That’s 
gratifying when the numbers work and make sense (or cents!). 

Table 69.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. [ used linear regression on volume to find the slope of a 
“best fit” line through the volume bars. Just over half the time, volume sloped 
upward from start of the pattern to the end (breakout). 

Rising/Falling volume. When volume increased from the start of the pat- 
tern to the end, we find better performance. Maybe that’s a sign of enthusiasm. 
It suggests volume is higher after price bottoms than before (not always, of course. 
You could have one day with huge volume skewing the numbers). If lots of people 
are trading the stock as price rises, it often translates into better performance. 

Breakout day volume. Because I arbitrarily chose the 38.2% retrace 
value as the “breakout,” I’m not sure how important large breakout day vol- 
ume is. Even so, heavy volume on the day of breakout suggests mildly better 
performance (bear markets show a wider spread, though). 

Table 69.7 is supposed to show statistics related to stop-loss order loca- 
tion. I don’t include it because my computer couldn’t make sense of the pattern. 

Table 69.8 This table shows how the pattern has performed over the last 
three decades. 


Table 69.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 59% up 58% up 
Rising volume trend performance 42% 35% 
Falling volume trend performance 36% 27% 
Heavy breakout volume performance 41% 35% 
Light breakout volume performance 38% 29% 

Table 69.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 44% 
2000s 41% 
2010s 33% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 17% 
2000s 18% 


2010s 22% 


1084 V-Bottoms 


Performance over time. The 1990s showed the best performance, and 
the 2010s had the worst performance. Performance has dropped steadily, 
which I find interesting. 

Failures over time. Failures are a count of how often price fails to rise 
more than 5% after an upward breakout. I excluded the two bear markets in 
the 2000s. 

The 1990s had the lowest failure rates and the 2010s had the highest, 
showing an increasing trend to fail. 

Table 69.9 shows how busted patterns perform. 

Busted patterns count. A lot of patterns bust, and the V-bottom is no 
exception. Over a quarter of them will see price rise less than 10% after the 
breakout, head down, and close below the bottom of the pattern, busting the 
upward breakout. 

Busted occurrence. A single busted pattern would send price lower after 
an upward breakout. Indeed, we see most of the busts are single ones. That’s 
especially true in bear markets where 90% of the patterns that bust are single 
busts. For a double or triple+ (more than two) bust, price has to cross from 
the bottom of the pattern to above the top. That’s a long hike, so double and 
triple+ busts are rare. 

Busted and non-busted performance. Because we’re dealing with a 
pattern that has an upward breakout, a busted pattern would send price lower. 
That’s why you see negatives in the table. It measures the drop from the bot- 
tom of the pattern to the ultimate low. Single busted patterns outperform the 
single, double, and triple+ busts (all busted patterns), as one might expect. 
I also include the drop from a V-top, which is the closest pattern to a V-bottom 
except it has a downward breakout. The results compare busted patterns with 
a normal drop from a V-top. 


Table 69.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 592 or 30% 435 or 26% 
Single bust count 440 or 74% 392 or 90% 
Double bust count 130 or 22% 35 or 8% 
Triple+ bust count 22 or 4% 8 or 2% 
Performance for all busted patterns -18% -22% 
Single busted performance -22% -24% 


Non-busted performance (V-tops) -15% -24% 


Trading Tactics 1085 


Trading Tactics 


Table 69.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. I set the left top of the V-bottom as the target. 
The bottom portion of the table shows that about half of the patterns see price 
rise to match the start. If you page back to Figure 69.1, ’m talking about the 
rise at D meeting or exceeding the price of A, which it does. 

Figure 69.2, pattern DEF, shows a V-bottom, but this one reaches the 
measure rule target at G. Pattern ABC on the same chart does not meet the 
target (price fails to climb up to the price of A). 

Bull markets do slightly better than bear markets in reaching the target. 

I also include other benchmark points to help indicate how well price 
rises during a V-bottom. For example, in bull markets, 85% of the patterns will 
retrace half the drop from the top of the pattern. Slightly less, 70%, will climb 
to the 66% retrace value. Finally, if you compute the height of the left side of 
the V-bottom, then take half of it and add it to the top of the V (at the start) for 
a target, we find that 27% see price climb that far. 

When you know what your target will be, take the difference between the 
distance to the target and the current price. Divide by the current price and 
compare the result with Table 69.3. 

For example, if the target means a rise of $5 above the breakout price of 
$50, that’s a 10% move. Table 69.3 says that in bull markets, 31% of V-bottoms 
will fail to see price rise more than 10%. That also means 69% will see price 
exceed the target (but you could still lose money by botching the trade). 

Buy location. Squiggles on a chart become a V-bottom when price 
retraces at least 38.2% of the way up from the bottom of the pattern. Thus, 
you can compute where the breakout will be and place a buy stop there. 


Table 69.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule The price at the start (left top) of the V-bottom is the measure rule 
target. The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches 
the target. 


Buy location With this pattern, you know that the breakout price will be 38.2% of the 
height of the left side of the V, added to the bottom of the V. 


Quick trade Price can recover quickly in a V-bottom, making for a fast profit. 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching midway up left side 85% 85% 
Percentage reaching 2/3 up left side 70% 69% 
Percentage reaching left side top 52% 42% 


Percentage reaching 1.5x height 27% 15% 


1086 V-Bottoms 


Quick trade. I mentioned this earlier in Table 69.2, “Days to ultimate high.” 
Because of the sharp rise (or the hope of a sharp rise) after the pattern bottoms, 
the V-bottom presents an opportunity for swing traders to make a quick buck. 

Buy at the breakout and sell at the top of the pattern. If price closes below 
the bottom of the V, sell. You may even wish to place a stop just below the buy 
price. If you’re lucky, you can ride price to the top of the pattern and per- 
haps higher. 


Experience 


The chapter on cloudbank patterns discussed a trade in Northwest Pipe Co. 
(NPWxX). This is the second buy of that trade, bringing me up to a full posi- 
tion. I bought at different times, for different reasons, but sold at the same 
time. Let’s discuss this trade. 

When I’m adding to an existing position, as I did in this trade, my note- 
book only contains a few notes for the entry instead of a long checklist. The 
idea is that I already know about the stock because I already own it. 

Here’s what I wrote about the buy: “2 November 2016. I am going to 
buy at market open tomorrow to give me a full position [after combining with 
the other trade]. The weekly chart shows a V-type rebound, and we are near 
the bottom of that V, so it’s a good time to buy. Yes, I expect this to retrace in the 
next 10 days as many good quarterly reports do, but if not, I don’t want to be 
left on the sidelines. Plus, I’m flush with cash. Target 22 to 25.” 

Figure 69.4 (note: weekly scale) shows the big decline from A to B, a 
breathtaking drop of 82%. That’s the left side of the V-bottom. 


Northwest Pipe Co (NWPX) 


ae 


14J)AS ONDI5FMAMJ JASON DI6F MAM J JA SONDI7FMAM J J ASONDI8FMAM 


Figure 69.4 A V-bottom trade made 35%, shown on the weekly scale. 


Sample Trade 1087 


‘Two days before I bought the stock, the company announced earnings. 
I bought at C. Combined with news of a new pipe contract within the past 
month, the stock moved higher on the combined events. 

Had I waited for the 38.2% retrace of the move down from A to B, 
that would have meant an entry at D. The price scale is logarithmic, so keep 
that in mind. Every trade is different, so I bought into the stock well before 
the traditional confirmation signal, and yet it was well off the bottom price 
of 7.46. 

The stock made its way higher to almost 20 and then retraced back to just 
below my buy price in April, but I hung in there. 

If you look at the chart of the stock going back to November 2010, you'll 
see a cloudbank pattern starting then and lasting for 2 years. That cloudbank 
provided the exit signal with a cloud base of 20. 

For the sale, which I show as E, I wrote this in my notebook: “9 January 
2018. S&P says strong sell as of 3 January 2018. Everything is negative: value, 
quality, growth, financial health, price momentum. Other analysts are red 
[bearish], too. Dump this? Insiders are holding onto shares, though. Cloud- 
bank is at 20, so [the stock is] right there, at the base. 

“Sell reason: This didn’t go anywhere this past year, but what scares 
the willy out of me is the negative analyst view. So I’m going to let it all go. 
Sell reason: Hit cloudbank base.” 

On this trade I made 35%. 


¢ Lesson: I was late buying into the trade, both in time and price. The 
turn at bottoms is often V-shaped, whereas peaks are more rounded- 
looking. Try to improve the entry. 


The stock continued higher, in large up-and-down swings, eventually 
reaching 36.70 in February 2020 (which was above the 22 to 25 target of 
this trade). 


Sample Trade 


Figure 69.5 shows a trade Dave made in the stock. I have the V-bottom start- 
ing its decline from point A as the chart shows (but the V might really start at 
D. Your choice). 

Price paused once at D before resuming a steep and fast drop to B. 
The height of the V-bottom is A-B or 114.55 — 89.05 or 25.50. 

If Dave were to buy the stock at the bottom, he could make $25 a share in 
about a month, providing the stock recovered as fast as it dropped. That’s rare. 
We’ve seen in this book that price drops twice as fast as a rises, so a good hold 
time would be 2 months. Of course, to make that kind of gain ($25.50), he’d have 
to buy at the exact bottom and not wait for price to climb back to the breakout. 


1088 V-Bottoms 


American Express Co (AXP) 


scaievisaniatorenneiie 
R 


18 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 69.5 Dave bought this stock at the breakout and rode price higher. 


The calculated breakout price would be 38.2% of 25.50 added to the low 
at 89.05 for a price of 98.79. Price crossed that threshold at C. 

“Tm a swing trader willing to take a risk, so that’s where I put my buy 
stop. I bought at 98.79. What was my target? The top of the pattern at 114.55. 
For a stop, I placed it at 93.13 [below H], about a dime below the minor low.” 

Price moved sideways for a week, which worried him. If the pattern 
behaved like it should, the vertical move would continue. Instead it took a 
week for the bulls to regroup and overpower the selling pressure of the bears 
to force price higher. 

“When the stock climbed to E, I expected the stock to pause there.” 
Why? “Because of resistance already shown at that price by the sideways move 
[at D].” He took that opportunity to raise his stop to I, to 103.33, or 10 cents 
below the minor low there. 

Price moved sideways for about 2 weeks before making a dash up to F. 
Here’s where it gets tricky. The stock took longer than he hoped, or expected, 
to reach as high as it did (it should have hit the price of A by 26 February if 
price climbed half as fast as it dropped). 

The stock at F was at 114.25, or slightly below the price of A (114.55). 
If the stock continued higher, he’d sell automatically at the target. But he also 
knew there might be overhead resistance lurking to stop the advance. 

When price closed lower the next day, “I figured the advance was done 
and sold the stock at the opening the next day, at 112.26.” He made $13.47 per 
share for a hold time of about 2.5 months. 

As the chart shows, the stock retraced for a few more days before 
resuming the upward trend. It found the ultimate high in late January 2020. 


70 


V-Bottoms, Extended 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A V-shaped pattern with the right side seeing price retrace for a time. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term Short-term 
bullish reversal bullish reversal 

Performance rank 24 out of 39 3 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 10% 7% 

Average rise 40% 33% 

Volume trend Downward Downward 
‘Throwbacks 62% 73% 
Percentage meeting 51% 36% 

price target 
See also V-bottom, ugly double bottom 


The V-bottom is an unusual creature, but in the extended version, we add a 
handle to the pattern, which makes finding a trading entry easier. A handle is 
the best way to describe the extension. Price forms a V, rises up, and moves 
sideways to down in the extension. You can think of the extension as a flag that 
appears in an uptrend. I’ll show a chart of the pattern in a moment. 

The above Results Snapshot shows a pattern with a low failure rate but 
also a low average rise in bull markets (ranking 24 where | is best). Bear mar- 
kets do much better, ranking third because of the 33% average rise. 


1089 


1090 V-Bottoms, Extended 


Price reaches the measure rule target between a third and half the time, 
which is disappointing. A half-height target works better. We’ll discuss that 
in the Trading ‘Tactics portion of this chapter. Let’s take a tour of this pattern. 


Tour 


Figure 70.1 shows what a typical example of an extended V-bottom pattern 
looks like (from A to C). The top of the V begins at A, although you might wish 
to include the drop from the September high (which would make the pattern 
look too tall, I think). Price plunges in a straight-line run down to the bottom 
of the V, near B. 

Price recovers (following trendline B) in a straight-line run that mir- 
rors the angle of the AB drop. Then something happens to swat the bulls 
into submission. Price moves sideways (in this example), forming a ledge, 
shelf, or handle, at C (pick your favorite adjective, or just call it the exten- 
sion). This sideways move is the ideal pattern, where the extension is hori- 
zontal, but it need not be. Oftentimes you'll see price trend downward 
(in the extension), but rarely will it trend upward. In this case, the horizontal 
move at C looks like a diamond top, or perhaps an inverted roof would be a 
better match. The extended V-bottom pattern ends on the right side of the 
extension. 

Volume trends downward (D) in this example and that’s typical for the 
extended V-bottom. 


Avery Dennison Corp (AVY) 


lit ms 


18 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 70.1 This is what an ideal extended V-bottom (ABC) looks like. 


Identification Guidelines 1091 


After the extension completes, price resumes its upward move, rising to 
E. An upward breakout happens when price rises above the top of the high at 
G (the top of the short uptrend leading to the extension). 

Price completes a throwback to the breakout price but continues lower 
to F in this example. That decline is not what you like to see after an extended 
V-bottom, though. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 70.1 shows identification guidelines for the extended V-bottom. Refer 
to Figure 70.2 for additional flavor. 

Appearance. The extended V-bottom begins with the swift, straight-line 
drop at A. Price bottoms at B and retraces a portion of the drop, forming the 
bottom and right side of the V (F or C). Price moves diagonally higher in the 
extension at D with a drop at E, marking the end of the extension. After that, 
price meanders higher. 

I show this extended V-bottom for one reason, the quick drop at E. 
Before I describe that, let me say that this is not an ideal extended V-bottom. 
Price rises to F and that looks like the mirror of the drop from A to B, but a 
lot shorter, of course. After that, a small extension forms from F to C, which is 


Table 70.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Appearance A straight-line run down (or nearly so) on the left side of the V followed 
by an upward retrace that sees price recover some but not all of the 
prior drop. Price moves sideways to down in the extension before 
resuming an upward move. 


Plunge From the top of the V to the bottom, price drops at least 15%, but the 
average is higher: 29%. 


Extension After price retraces a portion of the left-side drop (of the V), price 
moves horizontally to down, forming the extension. It does not drop 
far enough to form a second bottom. Rather, price pauses for a time 
in its upward move before resuming the uptrend. The median exten- 
sion is 14 days long. 


Volume Trends downward from the start of the V to the day before the break- 
out (extension end). 
Breakout, A breakout occurs when price closes above the right side of the V, 
confirmation before the extension. The breakout is upward most of the time. You 


may wish to wait for price to close above the top of extension. The 
breakout confirms the pattern. 


Duration 3 weeks to 3 months. 


1092 V-Bottoms, Extended 


AMN Healthcare (AMN) 


Apogee Enterprises 


i #44. : ; (APOG) 7 
\ WN ni! ‘ af on ria 
tl i i January\ 4 WV hii’ t 
my A 2010. Ie 7 
* 
\b ial AT Air Transport Services| 6 
Ay Ag Group f 
\ ny M ae ) ¥ 


Hr sy Ny 
Ng} 


April 20181 


i He 


May 10 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 11 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 70.2 This extended V-bottom has a minor drop before the pattern 
completes. The two insets show variations. 


what you're looking for. If you want to conclude that line C marks the end of 
the extension, that’s fine. But I wanted to discuss the drop at E and chose this 
flawed example of an extended V-bottom. 

I see that short drop at E frequently (about 25% of the time) in extended 
V-bottoms. In this example, the bottom of the extension is diagonal (D), but 
we see an E-type plunge in horizontal (APOG inset) and even down-sloping 
(ATSG inset) handles. 

Plunge. I set a minimum drop of 15% on the left side of the V (from A 
to B). However, the drop is usually more extensive than that, averaging 29%. 

Extension. The extension of the V sees price move horizontally to 
down. If the stock drops during construction of the extension, it should not 
fall far enough to make a second bottom (as in a double bottom). In the 
best-looking extended V-bottoms the extension will be horizontal, and that’s 
more common than you might think (but it’s not like you'll see it in the gro- 
cery aisles). 

Often you'll see a short downward retrace of the move up from the bot- 
tom of the V. In other words, the extension will tilt downward. We see that in 
inset ATSG. 

Volume. Volume trends downward 68% of the time from the start of the 
V (A) to the end of the extension (C). Often you'll see low volume at the start. 
As price approaches the bottom of the V, volume typically increases, being 
highest at the bottom, but then recedes as price rises to the start of the exten- 
sion. G shows an example of rising volume. 

Breakout, confirmation. To make things easy, I set the breakout to be 
a close above the high at the right side of the V, before the extension begins. 
You may wish to use a close above the high set in the extension. 


Focus on Failures 1093 


The pattern confirms when price breaks out upward. A downward break- 
out invalidates the pattern. Downward breakouts are rare, happening 11% to 
12% of the time when you use the breakout location as I just described. 

Duration. I set a minimum duration of 3 weeks to make sure price 
dropped in a steep move down, but not accompanied by a large one-day price 
gap. I set a maximum of 3 months because I wanted the right side of the V to 
mirror the angle of the left side. These values are arbitrary. 


Focus on Failures 


As I mentioned, a downward breakout invalidates an extended V-bottom. 
A downward breakout happens when price drops far enough to close below the 
bottom of the V instead of first breaking out upward. A downward breakout 
would represent one type of extended V-bottom failure. 

Figure 70.3 shows a different kind of failure, a 5% failure. A 5% fail- 
ure occurs when price does not rise far enough above the breakout price 
before turning down and closing below the bottom of the pattern or dropping 
more than 20%. 

In this example, the extended V-bottom is the move from A to D. Price 
drops in a straight-line run from A to B. At B, the downtrend reverses and 
price climbs but only to C. After C, the extension forms and price travels 
sideways to D. 

Because I set the breakout price when the stock closes above the high price 
at C, the breakout occurs at D, in the middle of the extension (in this example). 


Valaris Plc (VAL) 
vine 


be. 
Oh ‘ ¥ ‘ | 
Hye? il, ni oe 
my i) m ‘i 1 vy" F a 26 
i) 1 Me 
' 


18 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 70.3. This extended V-bottom doesn’t see price rise much after the upward 
breakout at D. 


1094 V-Bottoms, Extended 


Price meanders higher until reaching the ultimate high at E. Point E is less 
than 5% above the high at C. When price drops to F (bottom of the chart), the 
pattern’s fate is sealed as a 5% failure. 

These types of failures are rare, happening between 7% (bear market) 
and 10% (bull market) of the time. That failure rate is rare until you find one 
grabbing onto your trade and holding on like a pit bull. 


Statistics 


Table 70.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. Even though I automated finding some of these pat- 
terns, I didn’t find many: 479, but that includes downward breakouts. There 
were too few of those, so I limited the presentation to upward breakouts 
in bull and bear markets. I found patterns in data from August 1991 to 
October 2019, but not all stocks covered the entire period, and some no 
longer trade. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Most of the patterns acted 
as reversals. Because the breakout is upward for this pattern, the inbound price 
trend must be downward to make the pattern act as a reversal. The inbound 
downtrend does not include the left side of the V. 

Reversal/continuation performance. The performance difference 
between reversals and continuations is a close tie, really. The performance dif- 
ferences are probably not statistically significant. 

Average rise. The bull market average rise is above that shown by the 
bear market results. No surprise there. Compared to other bullish chart pat- 
terns, however, the bull market results are weak, but the bear market ones 
are strong. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The performance of the index can’t 
match the performance of the extended V-bottom, despite buying the index 


Table 70.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 


Reversal, continuation performance 


Average rise 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change 
Days to ultimate high 
How many change trend? 


288 
71% R, 29% C 
40% R, 38% C 
40% 
12% 
199 
53% 


135 

76% R, 24% C 
33% R, 34% C 
33% 

2% 

70 

61% 


Statistics 1095 


on the breakout day and selling on the day of the ultimate high (both dates are 
for the extended V-bottom). In other words, I checked the move in the S&P 
for the same hold time as if trading the extended V-bottom. 

My guess is that the general market helped the performance of the pat- 
tern, giving the bull market results a boost and the bear market results more 
of a nudge. 

Days to ultimate high. It takes over six months for price to rise 40% in 
bull markets but considerably shorter to rise 33% in bear markets. Crunching 
the numbers, the results say that bear markets see price rise twice as fast as do 
bull markets. 

I don’t know why that is except to say that maybe a bear market is like 
pulling on a spring. An upward breakout forces the spring to release and price 
shoots upward. Maybe in a bear market, if price is rising, it must have a good 
reason for doing so, hence the greater velocity. 

In other types of chart patterns, we’ve seen bear markets have a higher 
speed for both up and down breakout directions, often twice as fast. The veloc- 
ity is not faster than a speeding bullet, nor can it leap tall buildings, but the 
difference between bull and bear markets is interesting. 

How many change trend? I included this gauge to help determine if 
price rises far enough after the breakout. Patterns in bear markets do well, but 
the bull market is light on performance. Still, having half of the patterns see 
price rise more than 20% is a good thing. 

Table 70.3 shows failure rates. For example, in bull markets 30 extended 
V-bottoms, or 10%, failed to see price rise more than 5% after an upward 
breakout. Another 44, for a total of 74 or 26% of all extended V-bottoms 
I looked at, failed to rise more than 10% after the breakout. 


Table 70.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 30 or 10% 10 or 7% 
10 44 or 26% 18 or 21% 
15 32 or 37% 13 or 30% 
20 28 or 47% 12 or 39% 
25 24 or 55% 12 or 48% 
30 18 or 61% 15 or 59% 
35 7 or 64% 16 or 71% 
50 27 or 73% 12 or 80% 
75 37 or 86% 17 or 93% 


Over 75 41 or 100% 10 or 100% 


1096 V-Bottoms, Extended 


Another example: Almost half the patterns (47%) failed to see price rise 
more than 20%. That’s in bull markets. Bear markets have lower failure rates. 

Table 70.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. As I mentioned, not all of the patterns I catalogued 
broke out upward. Some had downward breakouts, but they were too few to 
include in the tables. 

Extension length. In Figure 70.3, the length of the extension is the move 
from C (the end of the uptrend on the right side of the V) to the breakout (D). 

Yearly position, performance. I sorted the breakout price into where it 
fits in the yearly price range and mapped performance accordingly. The best 
performance occurs when the breakout is within a third of the yearly low for 
both bull and bear markets. This pattern works well for traders who like to 
bottom fish (buy near the yearly low, sell higher), but it doesn’t work as well 
for momentum players (buy high, sell higher). I found that out the hard way 
(see Experience). 

Throwback. A throwback happens more than half the time, but it’s slower 
to unfold than usual. The round-trip for other chart pattern types is about 
11 days. The extended V-bottom takes almost two weeks for the stock to return 
to the breakout price. By definition, a throwback must happen within a month. 

The results suggest that you can make money if you’re a nimble trader. 
Place a buy stop a penny above the breakout price and sell about a week later. 
On average, you could capture 9% to 14% if you trade it often enough and 
perfectly. 


Table 70.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 88% up 89% up 
Extension length 18 days 15 days 


Performance of breakouts occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) 


L 41%, M 39%, 
H 37% 


L 35%, M 29%, 
H 29% 


Throwbacks occurrence 62% 73% 

Average time to throwback peaks 9% in 7 days 14% in 7 days 
Average time to throwback ends 13 days 13 days 
Average rise for patterns with throwbacks 36% 29% 

Average rise for patterns without throwbacks 45% 45% 
Percentage price resumes trend 65% 46% 
Performance with breakout day gap 44% 33% 
Performance without breakout day gap 38% 34% 

Average gap size $0.53 $0.51 


Statistics 1097 


We’ve seen with many other chart pattern types that a throwback hurts 
performance, and that’s true with extended V-bottoms, too. I think it’s because 
upward momentum is depleted during a throwback compared to those pat- 
terns that don’t have a throwback. 

Whatever the reason, look for nearby overhead resistance and try to pick 
patterns where there is little to none. Good luck with that (meaning it’s not 
easy to find such a situation and price may throw back regardless). 

After a throwback completes in bull markets, most of the time (65%) price 
will resume its upward march. You just have to remain in the trade long enough 
to participate in the rise (or consider buying after a throwback completes). 

Gaps. A breakout day gap helps propel the stock upward in bull markets, 
according to the statistics, and quite handily, too. Because I measured perfor- 
mance using the opening price the day after a gap appears, you can participate 
in the better performance by buying after the gap appears. 

Table 70.5 shows size statistics. 

Height. Many types of chart patterns show that tall patterns outperform 
short ones, and that’s true for the extended V-bottom. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones, but the differ- 
ences are tiny. It’s interesting that the numbers are mirrors of what the height 
shows (41% versus 38% and 38% versus 41% or 34% versus 33% and 33% 
versus 34%). That observation doesn’t have any significance except that it’s 
cool (I might be alone in this feeling). 

Height and width combinations. Because of the dearth of samples, 
I don’t put a lot of faith in the performance of combinations. In bull markets, 
anything except patterns that are both short and narrow work best. In bear 
markets, the best performance comes from patterns tall and wide. 


Table 70.5 

Size Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance 41% 34% 
Short pattern performance 38% 33% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 32.6% 48.3% 
Narrow pattern performance 38% 33% 
Wide pattern performance 41% 34% 
Median width 44 days 41 days 
Short and narrow performance 36% 36% 
Short and wide performance 41% 29% 
Tall and wide performance 41% 39% 


Tall and narrow performance 41% 28% 


1098 V-Bottoms, Extended 


Table 70.6 
Volume Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 68% down 68% down 
Rising volume trend performance 44% 32% 

Falling volume trend performance 37% 34% 

Heavy breakout volume performance 41% 33% 

Light breakout volume performance 39% 34% 


In Table 70.6 I measured volume in this pattern from the start of the V 
to the end of the extension (the day before an upward breakout). 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward most of the time, as the 
table shows. 

Rising/Falling volume. In bull markets, patterns with a rising volume 
trend work best. In bear markets, falling volume works better for extended 
V-bottoms. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout day volume propels the stock 
upward but only in bull markets. The performance difference for both bull and 
bear market numbers is small (one or two percentage points). 

Table 70.7, showing how often stops hit, doesn’t appear because my 
computer can’t measure the stop location for this chart pattern accurately. 

Table 70.8 shows performance and failure rates over three decades. 

Performance over time. The 2000s were the decade of best performance, 
and the worst was the 1990s. I’m at a loss to understand the wide swings in 
returns except to say that it might be due to few samples. 

Failures over time. Failures, oddly, have been climbing over the last 
three decades. Usually, failures track performance (the better the performance 
the fewer the failures). Failures are a count of how many patterns fail to see 
price rise more than 5% after the breakout. 


Table 70.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 32% 
2000s 47% 
2010s 38% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 7% 
2000s 8% 


2010s 13% 


Trading Tactics 1099 


Don’t look for Table 70.9, because you won’t find it. I didn’t test for 
busted patterns because the sample count was too low. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 70.10 shows trading tactics for extended V-bottoms. 

Measure rule, targets. The full-height target for the measure rule is 
the start of the V-top on the left. The lower portion of the table shows how 
often price rises to reach the target. Using the top of the V as the target, price 
reaches it 51% of the time in bull markets but only about a third of the time 
in bear markets. 

If you use half the height, the target is much closer and easier to reach 
before price changes trend. To use this, measure the height from the top of 
the V to the bottom, then take half of it. Add the result to the bottom of the V. 
The result will be the half-height target. Ill be close to the extension’s top, 
so the profit margin may be slim, too. 

Using Figure 70.3 as an example, the full-height target would be the high 
at A. As you can see, the stock never made it that high. 

A closer target would be half the height added to the bottom of the V. 
Eyeballing the chart, A is at 25 and the bottom of the V (B) is near 13, fora 
height of 12. Divide 12 by 2 to get the half-height value, or six. Add six to the 
price at the bottom of the V to get a half-height target of about 19. Price in 
this example reaches the target at D, right where the breakout is. If you were to 
trade this with a half-height target, the success rate would be 100%, but you’d 
make no money. 


Table 70.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule The measure rule target is the left side of the V. The bottom portion of 
the table shows how often price reaches the target using various 
heights. 


Buy Place a buy stop a penny above the top, right side of the V (as soon as 
you know an extension is forming). 


Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching half height target 92% 93% 
Left top of V 51% 36% 
Percentage reaching 2x height 23% 10% 


Percentage reaching 3x height 15% 4% 


1100 V-Bottoms, Extended 


You can multiply the height by any number you wish before adding it to 
the V’s low. Higher than 1 and the chances of price reaching it diminish dra- 
matically, as the table shows. 

Buy. As soon as you recognize the extension of an extended V-bottom, 
you can place a buy stop a penny above the top of the extension. That way, if 
price drops instead of rises, you won’t enter a trade. If price rises, it’ll get you 
into the trade at a good price. Just be aware that the ride to the ultimate high 
(or measure rule sell target) will likely be a bumpy one. Look at other extended 
V-bottoms (search for one in the same stock, stocks in the same industry, and 
stocks mot in the same industry, in that order, until you find a few examples) to 
see how price has behaved after the extension completes. The time spent doing 
the research might save you a bundle. 


Experiences 


After peaking in early 2018, Cabot Corp. (CBT) saw price plummet in October 
before reaching a bottom in December 2018. I show only the December drop 
in Figure 70.4. Price made tall swings after that, and it looked to be forming 
some kind of volatile base. 

‘The extended V-bottom I chose to trade is A to B (the left side of the V) 
with a recovery up to C, and the extension drifting down to H. The left side of 
the V sees price drop 18%, so it’s above the 15% minimum I like to see. 

I admit that this extended V isn’t typical. The extension (CH) is too far 
up the pattern. It should be located no higher than a third of the way up the 


Cabot Corp (CBT) 


F 37 
Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec = jan 20 


Figure 70.4 This extended V-bottom results in a two-losing and one-winning 
trade. 


Experiences 1101 


left side. That’s not a hard rule, though, just a guideline. I was more focused 
on the stock breaking out of the horizontal move (from December to June) 
rather than looking at this trade as an extended V. I used the extended V, as 
awful as it looked, as the buy signal. Maybe if the stock broke out upward from 
of its volatile up-and-down motion, it would form a straight-line run higher. 
Wouldn’t that be nice? 

At D, I bought the stock as price broke out upward from the extension. 
The next day price peaked, and then, well, it fell apart. 

The recommended position size calculated by my computer was well 
below a full position (based on volatility of the stock and the general market), 
and I took half of that, so the result was one-third the maximum size. 

I considered this trade both a buy-and-hold position and also a swing 
trade with a 63 to 66 target. 

What does that mean? 

[had a sell target in mind (63 to 66) but didn’t particularly care how long 
it took to get there (within reason, that is). That may sound strange, but when 
you have excess cash and don’t like to see it earning almost zero in the broker- 
age account or money market fund, I like to put it to work. 

The buy-and-hold also gave me flexibility with stop placement. That 
means I didn’t have to use a stop, but I calculated one anyway: 43.57 or almost 
6% below the buy price. I didn’t use it, as I mentioned. From my notebook: 
“Consider selling on close below 44.50, the extension part of the V-bottom 
(below H).” 

The upside target was the bottom of a flat move from July to October 
2018 (not shown). It made for a formidable resistance layer. “It won’t go much 
higher,” I wrote in my notebook. 

The industry and markets were up over a look back of 1 month but 
weaker going back 2 and 6 months, so both were recovering. The stock was 
rising against the S&P 500 index, which is important. I like to choose stocks 
that are doing better than the general market. 

With the low at H as a good place to sell the stock should the trade go 
bad, what did I do? I bought more, of course, a bit less than a third of a position 
at F. “15 August 2019. Buy reason: Average down. Yesterday the Dow [industri- 
als] were down 800, and I was hoping it would sink more today so I could grab 
a few. But the market and the stock didn’t move much. I bought about 20-30 
minutes before the close. I’m thinking that the stock will recover. It’s like a flat 
base followed by pothole setup. All it has to do is go back up to the low 60s.” 

The stock recovered, as the chart shows. At E, I wrote this in my note- 
book: “8 November 2019. This looks like an easy win. The flat base is obvious, 
from November 2018 to late October 2019. The stock has broken out above 
this. So I’m expecting a rise up to the low-to-mid-60s, say 65 as a target. Buy 
reason: flat base. P’ll double my position.” 

The first buy had bad timing. Yes, the stock continued higher but for 
only a day. The second entry had wonderful timing. I bought at the bottom 


1102 V-Bottoms, Extended 


of the trading range. The third buy, the one at E, was also spectacularly bad. 
The stock dropped after I bought. The “easy win” was anything but. 

On 13 January 2020 (G), I decide to sell. “Order details: I sold it all yes- 
terday just before it gained a point. Sell reason: Weakness. I don’t see this 
making an explosive move upward like the tech stocks, so I can better put the 
$ to use elsewhere.” 

Indeed, the stock wasn’t finished going down. When Covid-19 hit, it took 
the stock all the way down to bottom at 20 in March, a drop of 55% below my 
sale price. 

On the first trade, I lost 2%, the middle one made me 21%, and I gave 
back 9% on the third trade. That’s with dividends included. 


¢ Lesson: Even buy-and-hold positions go bad. A timely sale of the first 
position would have been at H, below the extension’s low. 

¢ Lesson: The second trade would have been perfect had I sold at E 
instead of buying more. 

¢ Lesson: The third trade should have been sold as soon as it became 
clear I had made a mistake. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 70.5 shows this chapter’s sample trade Jake made. 

The stock started forming the V at G, but Jake didn’t recognize it at that 
point. No one would see the potential for the pattern then. Price made an 
amazing straight-line run down (A) from around 6 to below 2 in about two 
months, for a drop of 69%. Ouch! 


Nabors Industries, Ltd (NBR) 


A .. 2 

n Sm Uae Tela, yi ¢ é 
W 5 
Yi EE : 

\a Ta ¥" F He 

NY —Th ory po at | 
wile Y 4 

'k, im YY i J 4 i 
“ / c f | ‘ | 
Tl / ) 1 
\ 5 i ly ‘ 

1 
18 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 70.5 Jake makes 24% on this extended V-bottom trade. 


Sample Trade 1103 


One could expect a bounce after that kind of a crash, but would it form a 
V? ‘Time answered that question. Price recovered, following B, an almost mir- 
ror rise to the “A” decline (but much shorter). 

When price hit $3, the stock started moving sideways, forming the exten- 
sion which I show as C. 

“T watched the V-bottom unfold and saw the stock move sideways [at 
C]. The consolidation region was unusually tight-looking [before peak D], 
and when the stock broke out upward from the top of that region [at D], 
I decided to buy.” 

He received a fill at 2.96 at the open the day after D. The stock dropped 
that day and the next. “I thought I had made a mistake. Usually my trades work 
right from the start or not at all. I was concerned, but I’m also a patient trader 
and price didn’t drop much, fortunately.” 

He continued to hold onto the stock, and it rewarded him with a move 
up in early February that threw back to the bottom of the extension (the last 
touch of line C, on the right). 

The full-height measure rule target was the high at G, or 5.82. The low 
at the bottom of the V was 1.81 for a height of 4.01. Half the height was 2.00, 
which, added to the bottom price of the V, gave a half-height target of 3.81. 
That matched the high price at H (early April, the letter is buried in the chart 
about midway in the rising wedge). 

“T placed a stop below the extension [at 2.61] because I liked how it acted 
as support. Maybe it would do so again.” If you look at the chart, you'll see that 
it didn’t support price during the drop in May (shown as a horizontal line at I, 
but did act as resistance at J). 

Price climbed in a rising wedge—-type move (the two up-sloping and con- 
verging lines). Jake didn’t use the half-height target at H as a sell signal. 

When price closed below the bottom trendline at F he sold the stock at 
the next day’s open and received a fill at 3.67 for a gain of 71 cents or 24%. 
If he’d sold at the half-height target, he could have made 29%. That’s one of 
the reasons I suggest short-term traders use price targets as sell signals. Often 
you'll make more and reduce stress at the same time. 

If he’d sold at the ultimate high, E (4.08), he could have made 38%. 


TT 


V-Tops 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: Looks like an inverted V. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term bearish 
bearish reversal continuation 
Performance rank 20 out of 36 5 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 29% 14% 
Average decline 15% 24% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 56% 56% 
Percentage meeting 37% 55% 
price target 
See also V-top extended 


The V-top is better described as an inverted V-top because that’s what it looks 
like. Pl show a chart of one later. The Results Snapshot reveals a pattern that 
sees price fall the usual amount for bearish patterns, about 15% in bull mar- 
kets, but the breakeven failure rate is high, at 29%. That value sounds a note of 
caution that this pattern should be traded only by the experienced hand. 

The performance rank for bearish patterns is top notch, placing fifth 
where a rank of 1 is best. Bull market performance shows the rank well down 
the list, at 20 out of 36 pattern types. 


1104 


Tour 1105 


Tour 


Figure 71.1 shows an example of a V-top after a long and sometimes violent 
downtrend. The stock formed a rounded top from October 2010 to June 2011 
(not shown), then moved sideways for about a month. The stock tumbled, 
as shown in the chart, forming a V-top. That’s an odd place to put a topping 
pattern (at the bottom of a downtrend), but it qualifies as a valid V-top. Why? 
Because price climbed substantially during creation of the pattern. In this 
case, the move from the low at A to the high at B was 28%. If you had to run 
up a hill that was 28% higher than where you stood, you’d understand the 
significance. 

The stock broke out of the pattern downward when it retraced 38.2% 
of the rise up from A by definition (that says where the breakout is located 
and is not a reflection of the continued drop to C). The right side of this 
pattern almost saw the stock return to the launch price of A, but did not 
quite make it. Eventually, though, at D the stock dropped below the price 
of A. After that, the stock began to recover from the carnage of the prior 
six months. 

What this chart shows is typical for the V-top. It’s rare that the stock 
will drop on the right side of the V to the price level of the left side. In my 
terms, the stock doesn’t return to the launch price as often as you'd like 
or expect. 

Let’s look at guidelines for identifying V-tops. 


Amedisys Inc (AMED) 


wae ti, 26 
! = 24 
| e 
1 -22 
J -21 
ih - 20 

-19 
| -18 
Hay =17 
r ys hh \ hy : : 
1, l uff pit, wal "| -14 
0 "hy " B rh ¥ nba 3 
aa of “ye -12 
i f \ N ly hi, 1 ol q alt -11 
] / Ww i fee 7 
5 A. a Mh, r 
D -9 
- 8 
= af. 
6 
11 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 12 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 


Figure 71.1. A V-top appears at the bottom of a downtrend. 


1106 ~_—~V-Tops 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 71.1 shows identification guidelines. 

Appearance. The V-top is a pattern that sees price make a dramatic 
move higher, often following a straight line. The uptrend reverses. In well- 
behaved patterns, the move down the right side of the pattern mirrors the rise 
on the left. 

For example, the V-top in Figure 71.2 is at ABC. Price rises from A to B 
and then just as quickly drops from B to C. Notice that C doesn’t quite make 
it down to the launch price A, and that’s typical for many patterns, not just the 
V-top. Keep that tip in mind: Price doesn’t return to the launch price. It comes 
close, but often stops just above the launch price. You can use that tip in your 
trading to better time your exits. 


Table 71.1 
Identification Guidelines 

Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Looks like an inverted V. Price makes a sharp rise and turns lower. 
Rise Price climbs at least 15% to the top of the V. 
Volume Downward but the trend is close to random. 
Breakout direction, Breakout is downward when price retraces at least 38.2% of the 

confirmation prior rise. A downward breakout confirms the pattern as valid. 
Duration At least 14 days long with a maximum of 3 months. 


Cornerstone On Demand Inc (CSOD) 


Nyaa M Why =56 


14 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 71.2 This V-top does not see price return to the launch price. 


Focus on Failures 1107 


Rise. To qualify and keep the sample count reasonable, I require a climb 
of at least 15% to the peak of the V-top from the launch price. In the figure, 
that means I measured the rise from A to B as a percentage of A. In this exam- 
ple, price rises 24% from 35.87 to 44.37 (low to high). 

Volume. Volume trends lower from the start of the pattern to the end, 
but Table 71.6 will show that the numbers are close to random. Don’t discard 
a pattern because of an unusual volume trend. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. The breakout direction is down- 
ward by definition. I measured the rise from A to B and computed a retrace of 
38.2% of that rise. If the stock dropped to that price (on the move from B to 
C), then it qualified as breaking out downward. Meeting the retrace was also 
the entry signal. 

The pattern confirms as valid when it retraces at least 38.2% of the prior 
rise (breaks out downward). 

Duration. I limited the length of the pattern from 14 days to 3 months. 
Shorter than 2 weeks and price didn’t climb far enough to be a valid turn 
or it was composed of one tall price bar followed by a retrace. Longer than 
3 months and the pattern often didn’t resemble an inverted V. You can use your 
own guidelines, of course, but that is what I used. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 71.3 shows what a failure of a V-top looks like. The V-top pattern is at 
ABC. Price makes a strong push higher, from A to B, in a straight-line run up. 


Dril-Quip Inc (DRQ) 


Nw “ . 


18 Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 71.3 This is what a typical failure of a V-top looks like. 


1108 V-Tops 


That’s how it should be. The move measures from the low at A (38.26) to the 
peak at B (47.02) for a rise of 23%, easily meeting the 15% minimum. 

The height of AB is 8.76 and 38.2% of that is 3.35. Subtracting the result 
from the peak at B gives a confirmation or breakout price of 43.67. The low 
at C just squeaks by with a value of 43.31. In other words, the drop from B to 
C was far enough to qualify this as a valid V-top. Volume trends downward as 
shown at D and verified by linear regression. 

Everything looked like a textbook V-top. And that’s where the story turns 
into a nightmare. 

Price hits the low at C and then starts a climb to a new high. Price 
busts the downward breakout at E when it closes above the top of the chart 
pattern. 

Why did this pattern fail? That’s a good question for which I don’t have 
an answer. Imagine that price continued lower after C. The pattern would /ook 
like a V-top. But the way this one looks, it’s hard to see the pattern qualifying 
as a valid V-top, even though it does. 

Price did move lower, but it wasn’t until after E when the stock moved 
downward. I can only say that at C the bulls weren’t ready to surrender to 
bearish selling pressure. Buying demand overwhelmed selling pressure and up 
the stock went. 

The company announced earnings in late February, and the following 
day, F, price reacted to that announcement. Over the next 10 days or so, the 
stock retraced its gain, forming a bottom at A. 

This rise-retrace move is what I believe to be typical for a good earn- 
ings announcement (an event pattern). The stock shoots higher then turns 
downward in a week to 10 days. This one dropped sooner than I would have 
expected, but it does bottom within the 10-day window. 

After that, the smart money grabs hold of the stock and encourages the 
bulls to buy like crazy, overwhelming selling demand. That leads to a straight- 
line run up to B where the stock takes a brief rest, like sitting on the summit of 
Everest. You don’t want to stay too long in the dead zone. 

We can guess that a rule might be not to trust a V-top within a month 
(or maybe longer) of better-than-expected earnings. There’s too much enthu- 
siasm to force price down in a successful V-top. 


Statistics 


Table 71.2 shows general statistics for the V-top pattern. 

Number found. I located almost 4,000 V-tops in 973 stocks from July 
1991 to June 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, but they sure are 
plentiful. Some stocks no longer trade, but it’s not the fault of V-tops. I just 
wanted to make that clear. 


Table 71.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Statistics 


Bear Market 


Number found 
Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 


Reversal, continuation performance 


2,416 
55% R, 45% C 
-14% R, -16% C 


1,599 
35% R, 65% C 
-20% R, -25% C 


Average decline -15% -24% 
Standard & Poor's 500 change -2% -7% 
Days to ultimate low 21 19 
How many change trend? 29% 52% 


1109 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. I checked the short-term 
inbound price trend to see if the pattern acted as a reversal or continuation 
pattern. Why bother? Because I’ve seen reversals outperform continuations in 
some patterns. 

Wouldn’t it be nice to get a trading edge by just looking at a pattern (that 
is, comparing the direction of the inbound price trend with the anticipated 
(or real) breakout direction)? 

In bull markets, slightly more patterns acted as reversals than continua- 
tions. That behavior flips for bear markets. In bear markets, almost two out of 
three patterns act as continuations. 

Reversal/continuation performance. For V-tops, continuations per- 
form better than reversals. So if you want an easy way to improve your trading 
results, trade with the trend. 

Because we know price breaks out downward from a V-top, the inbound 
trend should also be downward leading to the start of the V-top. 

Figure 71.1 shows an example of the V-top appearing in a prevailing 
downward price trend (yes, I know I made a big deal of price rising into the 
V-top, but let’s not confuse the issue with facts). 

Average decline. The star performer is the drop in bear markets, which 
averages 24%. Trade continuation patterns and you can boost that up to 25% 
(the prior row). 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. I show how the index performed using 
the same hold time from the breakout to the ultimate low. The V-top pattern 
outperforms the index by a wide margin. 

You can think of the results as how much of a push the general market 
lends to patterns. It’s a big push in bear markets (7% downward) but smaller in 
bull markets (2% downward). 

Days to ultimate low. Price bottoms quickly after downward breakouts. 
In about 3 weeks, the drop has ended. Imagine making 25% in 19 days. Nice. 


1110 V-Tops 


Of course, those numbers are averages and that’s if you trade the pattern per- 
fectly and frequently. In fact the drop in bear markets is 1.8 times as fast as in 
bull markets according to the numbers in the table. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many V-tops see 
price drop more than 20%. It favors upward breakouts, which can be unlim- 
ited. Downward breakouts can lose only 100% of their value. 

The table shows the penalty a trader faces when trading against the mar- 
ket trend. By that I mean trying to short in bull markets. Just 29% of the 
V-tops see price drop more than 20%. In bear markets the result is nearly 
double the bull market result. 

Table 71.3 shows failure rates, and it’s an exciting list of numbers! Well, 
maybe I exaggerate. 

I consider a chart pattern a failure if price can’t drop more than 5% after 
the breakout. For the V-top, we see that 29% qualify for dud status in bull 
markets. Over half (60%) of V-tops will fail to see price drop more than 15% 
in bull markets. The numbers suggest, perhaps strongly, that one should only 
trade a V-top in bear markets and then only if you know what you're doing. 

Let me show how this table is useful. Let’s say the measure rule picks a 
target $5 below the current price of $50. That’s a 10% drop. How many V-tops 
will fail to see price drop more than 10%? Answer: almost half, or 47% in bull 
markets. That’s a huge failure rate. 

Table 71.4 shows breakout statistics. 

Breakout direction. By definition, a V-top has a downward breakout. 
If price does not break out downward, then you don’t have a V-top. If price 
closes above the top of the V (before dropping below the 38% retrace), then 
that’s a failure. 


Table 71.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 705 or 29% 223 or 14% 
10 426 or 47% 176 or 26% 
15 327 or 60% 191 or 38% 
20 253 or 71% 157 or 48% 
25 212 or 80% 156 or 58% 
30 143 or 86% 150 or 68% 
35 124 or 91% 119 or 75% 
50 168 or 98% 259 or 92% 
75 57 or 100% 124 or 100% 


Over 75 1 or 100% 4 or 100% 


Statistics 1111 


Table 71.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 100% down 100% down 
Performance of breakouts occurring near L-16%, M-15%, L-26%, M -22%, 

the 12-month low (L), middle (M), H -14% H -19% 

or high (H) 
Pullback occurrence 56% 56% 
Average time to pullback bottoms -11% in 7 days -15% in 8 days 
Average time to pullback ends 13 days 13 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks —16% -21% 
Average decline for patterns with- -14% -27% 

out pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 30% 32% 
Performance with breakout day gap -17% -27% 
Performance without breakout day gap -15% -23% 
Average gap size $0.72 $0.71 


What does a failure to break out downward look like? Figure 71.3 shows 
an example except the right side (the drop from B to C) would not drop to the 
38.2% breakout price. If price doesn’t make it down that far, then by definition 
it’s not a valid V-top. 

Yearly position, performance. I sorted the patterns into bins accord- 
ing to where in the yearly price range the breakout occurred and mapped 
performance. 

For both bull and bear markets, the best performance comes from V-tops 
within a third of the yearly low. The worst performance comes from patterns 
near the yearly high. This makes sense. You should avoid shorting stocks mak- 
ing new highs, but consider shorting those patterns making new lows. That’s a 
general rule, of course, and there are exceptions. If you’re me, you avoid short- 
ing altogether (due to unlimited risk). 

Speaking of risk, I mentioned this anecdote in Chapter 37, but it bears 
repeating. Joe Campbell had $37,000 in his brokerage and bet a $2 biotech 
stock would fall further. The next day, the stock surged to $16, wiping out his 
account and resulting in the brokerage handing him a bill for an additional 
$106,000. Think about that the next time you short a stock. 

Pullbacks. Pullbacks happen just over half the time. They must occur 
within a month of the breakout by definition. 


1112 V-Tops 


A pullback sees the stock return to the breakout price, often in about 
a week, before (sometimes) resuming the downward trend. The table shows 
details about the depth and speed of the pullback. If you’re an experienced 
trader, you may be able to short at the breakout and set an order to cover in a 
week at about 10% below the current price. 

Pay attention to how often price resumes trending lower. ‘To flip the 
numbers around, we see that up to 70% of the time, the stock will continue 
rising after a pullback completes. In other words, the low found during a pull- 
back becomes the ultimate low. 

Gaps. The last section of the table concerns breakout day gaps. The 
appearance of a gap on the breakout day suggests better performance. That’s 
frequently (but not always) the case for various types of chart patterns. 

Fortunately, you don’t have to be in the stock to take advantage of 
a gap. I measured performance from the opening price the day after the 
gap to the ultimate low, so you can buy the stock later to participate in the 
performance. 

With a V-top and a mechanical location of the breakout (set at a 38.2% 
retrace) it’s difficult to justify that a gap appearing on the breakout day has any 
real significance. However, I think what the numbers are saying is that a gap 
shows selling enthusiasm and that enthusiasm translates into a larger decline 
than if a gap did not occur. To put it another way, price that gaps a lot during a 
downtrend in a stock probably tumbles further than a stock not showing a gap 
(but I haven’t tested this notion). 

Table 71.5 lists statistics related to the height and width of the V-top. 


Table 71.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -18% -30% 
Short pattern performance -12% -17% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 25.3% 31.0% 
Narrow pattern performance -15% -20% 
Wide pattern performance -15% -27% 
Median width 18 days 18 days 
Short and narrow performance -12% -16% 
Short and wide performance -12% -19% 
Tall and wide performance -19% -33% 


Tall and narrow performance -17% -26% 


Statistics 1113 


Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. Why this hap- 
pens I haven’t a clue, but it serves as a good rule for most chart pattern types. 
I measured height by taking the difference between the peak at the V-top and 
the bottom of the pattern (left side, where the pattern starts), divided by the 
breakout price. If the result is above the median shown in the table, then you 
have a tall pattern. Tall patterns perform substantially better than short ones. 

If you are trying to calculate the height to breakout price before the 
breakout, then divide the pattern’s height by the price of a 38.2% retrace of 
the upward move (that is, take 38.2% of the AB rise in Figure 71.3 and use 
that in the calculation). Compare your result with the median in the table to 
see if your V-top is short or tall. It’s worth the effort to exercise your calculator. 

Width. Width doesn’t give any advantages to trading in bull markets, but 
wider patterns perform better in bear markets. Even in bull markets, I’d stick 
to trading wide patterns. Why? Because the median performance (not listed) is 
one percentage point better if the pattern is wide (12% versus 11%). That’s not 
much of a difference, but it is an edge, based on 2,416 patterns. 

Height and width combinations. You’d expect to see tall and wide pat- 
terns outperform and short and narrow patterns (the opposite of tall and wide) 
to be the worst performers. The table shows that’s true. So run the height and 
width calculations of the V-top you wish to trade to see if you have an advan- 
tage or not. 

Even if the results say the pattern will outperform, it’s not guaranteed. 
You can flub the trade anyway. Regardless, the numbers are for over a thousand 
perfect trades, so your results will vary. You may make more than the average 
(or less). 

Table 71.6 shows statistics related to volume shown during the V-top. 

Volume trend. I measured the trend using linear regression and found 
that it trends downward just over half the time. 

Rising/Falling volume. Sorting performance into V-tops that showed 
rising volume from falling volume, we see better performance from those with 
a rising volume trend. The separation is highest in bear markets. 


Table 71.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 55% down 57% down 
Rising volume trend performance -17% -27% 
Falling volume trend performance -14% -21% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -15% -24% 


Light breakout volume performance -15% -24% 


1114 ~~ V-Tops 


Breakout day volume. Breakout day volume doesn’t have any effect on 
performance. That could be because the breakout date is set at an arbitrary 
location (partway down from the peak). Traders would not recognize a break- 
out from a V-top under those circumstances. 

Table 71.7 is supposed to show where to place the stop, but that table is 
only meaningful for patterns with breakouts at the top or bottom of the pat- 
tern, so you won’t find that table here. 

Table 71.8 shows how the V-top has performed over the decades. 

Performance over time. The numbers are close enough that there’s not 
a big difference between them. The 1990s showed the best performance, and 
the 2000s had the worst. 

Failures over time. The 2010s had the highest number of failures with 
almost a third of the V-tops failing to see price drop more than 5% during that 
decade. However, the three decades show similar failure rates. 

Table 71.9 shows how busted patterns performed. A bust occurs when 
price breaks out downward (for the V-top), drops less than 10%, and then 
closes above the top of the pattern. 

Busted patterns count. Almost half (46%) of V-tops in bull markets 
will bust their downward breakouts. Wow. Bear markets do substantially better 
with “only” 25% busting. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the types of busts into three categories. 
Single busts happen most often with triple+ (more than two) busts com- 
ing in second place. We’ve seen that behavior in other types of chart pat- 
terns, too. 

Busted and non-busted performance. I used the performance of 
V-bottoms as a gauge of how a busted V-top might perform. Single busted 
V-tops tend to see price soar, performing better than all busted patterns as 
a group and beating V-bottoms, too. However, you have to guess right that 
a single bust will occur (as opposed to a double or triple bust). With 84% 
of V-tops busting just once, that should be easy. Avoid patterns with nearby 
overhead resistance. 


Table 71.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -16% 
2000s -14% 
2010s -15% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 27% 
2000s 30% 


2010s 31% 


Trading Tactics 1115 


Table 71.9 

Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Busted patterns count 1,113 or 46% 382 or 25% 
Single bust count 931 or 84% 272 or 71% 
Double bust count 60 or 5% 28 or 7% 
Triple+ bust count 122 or 11% 82 or 21% 
Performance for all busted patterns 41% 22% 
Single busted performance 48% 29% 
Non-busted performance (V-bottom) 40% 32% 


Trading Tactics 


Table 71.10 shows trading tactics. You might want to ask yourself if it’s wise 
to trade this pattern at all. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule target is easy for the V-top. It’s 
the bottom of the pattern, where price begins its march to the V-top’s peak. 

The lower portion of the table shows how far down price might drop 
versus how often it actually makes it down that far. 

For example, I found that price drops halfway down the V-top 82% of the 
time in bull markets and even higher in bear markets. Just 37% will reach the 
low set by the left side of the pattern. That means if you set the launch price as 
the target, you’ll be wrong 63% of the time, on average, if you trade the pat- 
tern often enough (and it behaves like the ones I’ve studied). 


Table 71.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule The price at the start (bottom) of the V-top is the measure rule target. 
The bottom portion of the table shows how often various heights 
work for the measure rule. 


Busted pattern Consider trading a busted downward breakout. See Table 71.9 for guid- 
ance and read the Sample Trade. 


Tips See text. 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Percentage reaching midway down left side 82% 91% 
Percentage reaching 2/3 down left side 62% 78% 
Percentage reaching left side bottom 37% 55% 


Percentage reaching 1.5x height 11% 12% 


1116 V-Tops 


Busted pattern. Table 71.9 shows how well the average single busted 
pattern performs. Consider trading one of them. That is, price should drop less 
than 10% after a downward breakout, then reverse and close above the top of 
the pattern. That would be the time to buy, when the stock reaches or exceeds 
the top of the V-top. Hold it until it reaches the ultimate high and you’ll have 
made a perfect busted trade. I show an example of how difficult it can be to 
make money following a busted trading strategy next. 

Tips. I’ve mentioned in other chapters that knots of support make for 
terrific targets, and that’s true for swing trades in V-tops, too. A knot is where 
price overlaps itself for at least 3 days but can be much longer, forming a 
sideways move. 

Use the top price in the knot as the exit price. The knot should be the 
closest one located below the breakout price on the left side of the V. Price 
will drop to the top of that knot and start to rebound (perhaps as part of a 
pullback). 


¢ In another scenario, look from the launch price on the left side of the 
V to the breakout price. If it’s a straight-line run-up, a fast-paced rise 
but there’s no knot to park a sell order at, then divide the run in half 
and use that. 

For example, if the launch price is 25, the breakout price (not the 
pattern’s top) is 30, and price makes a vertical run up to the V-top, then 
place an order to cover the short at 27.50. That’s halfway down from 
the breakout to the launch price. 


If the stock is moving sideways, forming a flat base (perhaps month’s 
long) and a V-top appears, then don’t short the stock. It’s a trap. The 
stock will likely rise, bouncing off support set up by the flat base. 


If the stock is moving down at a steady clip, at least a month (but can 
be several months long) of steadily falling prices (like a 30-degree 
decline), then a short sale of the V-top can be rewarding. The stock 
after the V-top confirms just drills itself into the ground. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 71.4 shows this chapter’s sample trade using a V-top a bit differently 
than one would expect. 

Jim watched the price of the stock climb in a straight-line run up from 
A to B and retrace to C. He made sure that the pattern was tall enough to 
qualify as a V-top (at least 15%) and that the retrace of the AB move was 
deep enough (at least 38.2%). He also measured the drop from the breakout 
price to the bottom at C to be sure it would qualify as a busted V-top (the 
drop below the breakout price must be less than 10%, which it is, but it’s an 
arbitrary limit). 


Sample Trade 1117 


Form Factor Inc (FORM) 


06 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 07 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 71.4 Jim traded this busted V-top and sold after a complex head-and- 
shoulders top appeared. 


When the stock turned and started heading up, he placed a buy stop a 
penny above the top of the pattern. The stock cooperated and gapped higher 
(an exhaustion gap), but still triggered his buy order at 42.73 (D). 

He held onto the stock, hoping to receive a big payout for trading a sin- 
gle-busted stock. He’d have to wait to see if it really was a single bust and not 
a double or triple+, but the probabilities suggested it would be. “I had faith.” 

Price struggled to move higher in the coming months. It peaked at G 
and then started to ease lower. That’s when he noticed a complex head-and- 
shoulders top pattern. The two left shoulders (E, F) mirrored the two on the 
right (H, I) with a centrally located head (G). The neckline (the diagonal line 
leading to J), which is often nearly horizontal, tilted upward at a steep angle. 
He ignored the slope except that it provided a higher breakout price. 

“The head-and-shoulders made me nervous. I forgot about making 
84% from a busted V.” He placed a stop-loss order a penny below the low 
between the two shoulders H and J, at 43.38. It triggered at J, cashing him out 
of the trade. 

“T bought at 42.73, sold at 43.38, and made 65 cents a share, or about 
enough to buy a sub sandwich at the local deli.” 

Obviously, he would have done better if he had sold closer to the high 
at G, but who can tell that would be the high? Overhead resistance set up by 
prior peaks did suggest tough sledding until it pushed through to new highs. 
One warning sign was there. 

After he sold, the stock dropped, confirming his decision to sell as the 
correct one. This trade did turn into a single busted pattern, but one that didn’t 
come anywhere near the average rise of 84% for single busted trades. 


72 


V-Tops, Extended 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: An inverted V followed by a short retrace. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term 

bearish reversal bearish reversal 
Performance rank 2 out of 36 1 (best) out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 15% 5% 
Average decline 18% 26% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 63% 66% 
Percentage meeting 49% 60% 

price target 

See also V-top, ugly double top 


You might think that an extended V-top is just an extended V-bottom flipped 
upside-down. That’s true but only if you’re not a computer. [ had to program 
different instructions to find these compared to the extended V-bottom. 

An extended V-top is really an inverted V shape with a horizontal-to- 
upward retrace on the right side of the V. We’ll see an example in a moment, 
but the small picture above shows the basic outline. In this chapter, Pll just 
refer to the pattern as V-shaped, not inverted V-shaped. 

The average decline is excellent, ranking first or second (the performance 
rank) among other bearish chart patterns. The failure rate in both bull and 


1118 


Tour 1119 


bear markets is also topnotch, ranking third and first for bull and bear markets, 
respectively. 

The pattern can resemble an ugly double top. That’s not a pattern I 
review in this book. Think of a double top as twin peaks near the same price. 
In the ugly variety, the right peak is below the left one. 

Volume usually trends downward over the length of the pattern, from the 
start of the V to the end of the extension (the day before the breakout). 

Let’s look at some examples of an extended V-top. 


Tour 


Figure 72.1 shows what an extended V-top looks like at ABC. It begins with 
a strong push higher (A) in a straight-line run-up with few or no pauses along 
the way. The uptrend (in this example) is too steep to be sustainable for very 
long, so it peaks at B. Reaching the summit is a lot like climbing Mount Ever- 
est. You don’t want to hibernate up there in the death zone. That means the 
turn downward happens quickly. 

The drop on the right side from the summit is more sedate. In other 
words, the slope of the right side of the pattern will frequently not be as 
steep as the left side. You can see that in the figure, where the right side at 
the start (BC) doesn’t quite mirror the left-side slope (AB). 

Price drops to C where the extension begins. Price in the extension can 
be horizontal (rare) or upward (more frequent). I suppose it can even be down- 
ward, but I can’t recall having seen one of those. 


American Equity Investment Life Holding (AEL) 


6 

Mi ; 

Pai =e 
© |p A, : 


ih: on t 
ak en 


by 


\/ ; al’ i 4 ‘yt, 3 


18 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 72.1 Price forms an extended V-top followed by a strong move 
lower at D. 


1120 V-Tops, Extended 


At the end of the extension, price can either rise or fall. Most of the time 
it'll tumble (D). When price closes below the low set in the extension, then 
that’s the breakout. This example breaks out downward. In 11% of cases that 
break out upward, a close above the top of the extension signals a breakout. In 
this edition, I’m going to ignore upward breakouts because they are too rare 
to worry about. 

Volume trends downward nearly all the time in both bull and bear 
markets. I’ll discuss volume later in Table 72.6. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 72.1 shows identification guidelines for the extended V-top, and 
Figure 72.2 shows another example. 

Appearance. Despite the name extended V-top, the pattern is really an 
inverted V as I mentioned. Price moves up swiftly at the start of the pattern 
(AB), turns quickly (at B), and begins heading down (BC). 

Bullish buying demand as price drops halts the decline and a battle with the 
bears begins in earnest. The two warring sides struggle for dominance. If there 
is no clear winner, the stock will move sideways until one side is overcome. 


Table 72.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance A straight-line run-up (or nearly so) on the left side of the 


inverted V followed by a downward retrace that sees price 
recover only a small portion of the prior rise. Price moves 
sideways to up in the extension before resuming a downward 
move, completing the (inverted) V. 


Rise From the bottom of the inverted V to the top, price rises at least 
10%, but the average is higher: 31%. 
Extension After price retraces a portion of the left-side drop (of the 


inverted V), price moves horizontally to up, forming the 
extension. The stock does not rise far enough to form a 
second peak. Rather, price pauses for a time in its horizontal- 
to-upward retrace before resuming the downward move. 
The median extension is 14 days long. 


Volume Trends downward from the start of the inverted V to the end of 
the extension. 

Breakout, confirmation © A downward breakout occurs when price closes below the 
bottom of the extension, and it happens most of the time. 
A downward breakout confirms the pattern as a valid one. 


Duration 2 weeks to 3 months. 


Identification Guidelines 1121 


Flowserve Corp (FLS) 


15 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan16 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 72.2 Price in this extended V-top sees the stock return to the launch 
price (A) before pausing. 


If the bulls are stronger than the bears, the stock will slope upward (CD). Most 
of the time, bearish selling pressure will overcome buying demand and send the 
bulls running for cover. Down the stock goes, completing the pattern (E). 

Rise. Price at the start of the pattern (A) rises, making a straight-line 
run-up. That means price won’t pause (much) along the way to the top at B. 
If it does pause, then it should be brief. Look for an upward move that’s steep 
and swift so that on the way down you may also have a steep and swift decline 
(forming a V-top). That’s the ideal case. Of course, we’re not talking about a 
V-top but an extended V-top, where there is a pause along the way down. 

I programmed my computer so that rises on the left side of the V are at 
least 10% and go up from there, depending on price. The average rise (from A 
to B) is 31%, but the median is less, 25% (all figures are for bull markets). All 
of this means that the rise is strong and swift. 

Extension. After peaking, the stock turns lower for a time (a week or two, 
but I didn’t measure this) before beginning a retrace against the downtrend. 
The retrace is the extension (CD). It lasts a median of 14 days in bull markets. 
Price often rises in the extension, which you can see in the figure as the stock 
moves from C to D. 

Notice peak D remains comfortably below peak B, so there’s no confusion 
of this being a double top. 

Volume. Volume trends downward nearly all of the time. 

Breakout. The breakout can be either up or down, but you'll find a down- 
ward breakout happening 90% of the time (I’m not exaggerating). A downward 
breakout occurs when price closes below the bottom of the extension. 


1122 V-Tops, Extended 


In the figure, a downward breakout occurs at E, but you can use a higher 
exit point, such as when price closes below the up-sloping trendline C (making 
a breakout the day after D in this example). 

Because downward breakouts are prevalent, wait for price to break out 
downward to confirm a valid pattern. 

Duration. I limited the pattern’s duration between 2 weeks and 3 months. 
These are arbitrary limits but results seem to work well. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 72.3 shows what one of two failure types looks like. If you expect a 
downward breakout, then an upward breakout is a failure. We see that type of 
failure in this figure. 

The extended V-top begins at A when price starts a steep climb to B. The 
AB move forms the right side of a big W pattern with the left side peaking at F. 
You might guess that the downward-sloping channel ending at F would pose a 
serious problem for the stock to push its way through it heading upward (think 
overhead resistance). Indeed, the stock does rise above the channel (at G) but 
only briefly before tumbling. 

Returning to the extended V-top, the stock reverses direction at B, as if 
the overhead resistance of the channel (F) was too frightening to attempt a 
higher summit at this time. 

The stock retraced a portion of the AB move by dropping to C. Then the 
stock moved horizontally, forming the extension. A horizontal extension is rare 
but a joy to see nonetheless. 


Clorox Co The (CLX) 


— a 
H f i+ oy F B P Ay ' a 
y asa ‘\ | oN 4 
fy if Ri al Ww =40 


fC — 38 


t a yl -37 
mn Luis whys \ ee, 3 
[pte Ay |= 3 


00 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan0O1 Feb = Mar 


Figure 72.3 Price breaks out upward from this extended V-top. Upward breakouts 
are rare, but they happen. 


Statistics 1123 


In this case, the stock makes a surprise move, gapping higher (breakaway 
gap) and breaking out upward at D, closing above the top of the extension (the 
top horizontal line just below D). 

The failure of this pattern to break out downward is key. If you shorted 
the stock during formation of the extension, you’d likely take a loss when price 
climbed to G. 

But there’s another type of failure: the failure of a stock to drop far 
after a downward breakout (the so-called 5% failures). Let’s discuss statistics 
so we can pin down how often the extended V-top fails (which we’ll see in 
Table 72.3). 


Statistics 


Table 72.2 shows general statistics for the extended V-top. 

Number found. I found 1,739 patterns (with upward and downward 
breakouts) in 891 stocks with the first pattern appearing in July 1991 and 
the most recent in October 2019. The table reflects only those patterns with 
downward breakouts. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. The extended V-top acts 
as a reversal most of the time, especially in bull markets. Because we know the 
breakout is downward, a reversal means the inbound price trend is upward. 
An extended V-top behaving as a continuation pattern would appear in a 
downward inbound price trend. Pop quiz: Which performs better, reversals or 
continuations? 

Reversal/continuation performance. The answer doesn’t really matter. 
The numbers are too close to worry about. However, patterns acting as con- 
tinuations give a slight edge, based on what I found. 

Average decline. The average decline is terrific in bear markets, but 
that’s to be expected. If a rising tide lifts all boats in bull markets, then a falling 
tide sinks all boats. I know that doesn’t sound right, but my point is that you’d 


Table 72.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market 


Bear Market 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence 


Reversal, continuation performance 


Average decline 


Standard & Poor’s 500 change 
Days to ultimate low 


How many change trend? 


1,217 

68% R, 32% C 
-18% R, -19% C 
-18% 

-2% 

45 

37% 


334 

55% R, 45% C 
-25% R, -26% C 
-26% 

-9% 

42 

56% 


1124 V-Tops, Extended 


expect to see downward breakouts in bear markets have larger declines than 
do those in bull markets. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Measuring the performance of the S&P 
index using the same hold time (from breakout to ultimate low), we see the 
index underperforming the extended V-top. I can’t recall the S&P ever beating 
the performance of a chart pattern, but I’m also not sure it’s a fair measure. 

Why? I think it’s like comparing the performance of a professional mara- 
thon runner with an amateur. You’d expect the professional to win every race 
and by a substantial amount. 

However, let’s think of the general market as supporting the move in the 
stock. If the market drops by 2% or 9%, then that drop will help pull down a 
stock showing an extended V-top. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Notice that it takes 45 days to drop 
18% in bull markets but nearly the same time (42 days) to drop 26% in bear 
markets. In other words, price drops 50% faster in bear markets than in bull 
ones. Therefore, you’ll want to short in bear markets so you can get into trou- 
ble faster. 

How many change trend? I define a trend change as a move of more 
than 20% from the breakout. This item measures how many patterns see price 
drop more than 20%. In bear markets, over half the patterns will drop that far, 
which is terrific. Bull markets suffer, though, with just over a third seeing price 
drop more than 20% on the way to the ultimate low. 

Table 72.3 shows failure rates that I mentioned in the Focus on Failures 
section earlier. The numbers are cumulative. For example, I found that 183 
or 15% of the patterns I looked at (in bull markets) failed to see price drop 
more than 5%. Another 241, when combined with the prior row’s 183, totals 
35% of extended V-tops that will see price fail to drop more than 10% after a 
downward breakout. 


Table 72.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Decline (%) Bull Market Bear Market 
5 (breakeven) 183 or 15% 17 or 5% 
10 241 or 35% 44 or 18% 
15 194 or 51% 40 or 30% 
20 144 or 63% 45 or 44% 
25 119 or 72% 31 or 53% 
30 93 or 80% 37 or 64% 
35 89 or 87% 28 or 72% 
50 116 or 97% 66 or 92% 
75 36 or 100% 25 or 100% 


Over 75 2 or 100% 1 or 100% 


Statistics 1125 


As you scan down the rows, notice how failure rates climb dramatically 
for small “maximum price declines.” In bull markets, half the patterns will fail 
to see price drop 15% on the way to the ultimate low. 

Table 72.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The high percentage rate for downward breakouts 
means the pattern breaks out upward only 10% of the time. That’s small, but 
it’s not zero. So if you want to short a stock showing an extended V-top, then 
I’d wait for confirmation: price to close below the bottom of the extension 
before shorting the stock. It’s fine if you trigger on the low price and not the 
close, just be sure to use a stop to protect your position. 

Extension length. For the extended V-top, the extension’s length lasts 
an average of 15 days (calendar). By definition, the extension ends a day before 
the breakout. 

Yearly position, performance. I sorted the breakout price into where it 
appears in the yearly high-low price range and mapped performance for the 
three ranges (low, middle, or high). 

For bull markets, the best performance comes from patterns with break- 
outs within a third of the yearly low. That makes sense. You should short stocks 
making new lows, not making new highs. 

Bear market results say to avoid those stocks trading within a third of the 
yearly high for the best results. 


Table 72.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Breakout direction 89% down 90% down 
Extension length 15 days 15 days 
Performance of breakouts occurring near the L-21%, M-17%, L-27%, M -27%, 

12-month low (L), middle (M), or high (H) H-18% H -24% 
Pullback occurrence 63% 66% 
Average time to pullback bottoms -10% in 6 days -13% in 6 days 
Average time to pullback ends 12 days 11 days 
Average decline for patterns with pullbacks -19% -25% 
Average decline for patterns with- -18% -27% 

out pullbacks 
Percentage price resumes trend 51% 55% 
Performance with breakout day gap -19% -27% 
Performance without breakout day gap -18% -26% 


Average gap size $0.30 $0.45 


1126 V-Tops, Extended 


Pullbacks. A pullback happens after the breakout when the stock returns 
to the breakout price within a month. About two of every three trades in 
extended V-tops will see a pullback. Why is that important? Because when a 
pullback appears, performance suffers. That’s not evident in the bull market 
numbers but is more pronounced in bear markets. In fact, most chart pat- 
tern types suffer when throwbacks and pullbacks appear. Thus, look for nearby 
underlying support and choose to trade those situations where support is 
farther away. 

For a quick swing trade, you can short a stock when the low price 
drops below the bottom of the extension and close out the trade in 5 or 
6 days. If done accurately and often enough, you could make about 10% 
if your trades perform as well as the ones I looked at (and you trade it 
perfectly). 

After a pullback completes (that is, after the stock returns to or nears the 
breakout price), about half of the stocks will see price drop and half will have 
found the ultimate low during the pullback journey. Those finding the ulti- 
mate low are the ones that see price continue rising. 

Gaps. Breakout day gaps (a gap that occurs on the day when price breaks 
out downward) help performance. With the way I measured performance 
(from the day after the gap to the ultimate low), you can participate in the bet- 
ter performance buy trading the stock even after a gap. 

However, gaps don’t power the stock downward much faster than those 
patterns without gaps (meaning the performance numbers are close). 

Table 72.5 shows size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones according to the 
table, but that’s also true for the majority of chart pattern types. Measure 


Table 72.5 
Size Statistics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Tall pattern performance -20% -27% 
Short pattern performance -17% -25% 
Median height as a percentage of breakout price 22.0% 25.3% 
Narrow pattern performance -19% -28% 
Wide pattern performance -18% -23% 
Median width 34 days 33 days 
Short and narrow performance -17% -28% 
Short and wide performance -16% -21% 
Tall and wide performance -20% -25% 


Tall and narrow performance -21% -28% 


Statistics 1127 


the height of the pattern from the start of the V (bottom left side) to the top 
and divide the result by the breakout price (the low seen in the extension). 
If the result is higher than the median shown in the table, then you have a 
tall pattern. 

Width. I measured pattern width from the start of the V to the end of the 
extension (the day before the breakout). Narrow patterns perform better than 
wide ones, but the percentages in bull markets are close. I used the median 
width as the marker between narrow and wide. 

Height and width combinations. The table shows that tall patterns 
outperform and narrow patterns outperform, so the best combination will be 
extended V-tops that are both tall and narrow. That’s true in this case, but not 
for some other chart pattern types. If you can find a pattern that is tall and nar- 
row, then maybe, just maybe, it’ll perform better than the other combinations. 

You'll want to avoid short and wide patterns, regardless of the market 
(bull or bear) conditions. They perform worst. 

Table 72.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Volume trends downward the vast majority of the time 
in both bull and bear markets, but more so in bear markets. I found the slope 
of a line using linear regression from the start of the V to the end of the exten- 
sion. A downward volume trend suggests higher volume as price rises on the 
left side of the V and diminished volume as price slides downward and forms 
the extension. I’ve shown the volume trend (with sloping lines on the volume 
scale, such as point E in Figure 72.3) in the figures accompanying this chapter. 

Rising/Falling volume. Extended V-tops with falling volume tend to 
outperform those with rising volume, but only in bear markets. Bull markets 
show no preference. 

Breakout day volume. Usually high breakout day volume helps per- 
formance, but with downward breakouts that’s often difficult to see. In bull 
markets, heavy (above the prior month’s average) breakout volume helps 
performance, but in bear markets it hurts performance. The results are close 
enough in either case to be a meaningless comparison. 

Table 72.7 is supposed to show where to place the stop, but that table 
is only meaningful for patterns with breakouts at the top or bottom of the 


Table 72.6 
Volume Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend 83% down 89% down 
Rising volume trend performance -18% -23% 
Falling volume trend performance -18% -26% 
Heavy breakout volume performance -19% -25% 


Light breakout volume performance -18% -26% 


1128 V-Tops, Extended 


Table 72.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 

Description Bull Market 

1990s -20% 

2000s -18% 

2010s -17% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 13% 

2000s 13% 

2010s 20% 


pattern. I don’t show the table. Maybe you have to read between the lines 
to see it. 

Table 72.8 shows the performance of extended V-tops over the last 
three decades but with bear markets removed (because they only occurred in 
the 2000s). 

Performance over time. Performance has steadily deteriorated from the 
1990s. I can’t explain why. It’s a mystery. 

Failures over time. By “failure” I mean the failure of price to drop more 
than 5% after a downward breakout. In the 1990s and 2000s, the failure rate 
remained steady, but it jumped in the 2010s. 

I didn’t measure busted patterns for the extended V-top, so Table 72.9 is 
not included in this chapter. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 72.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. Because the pattern is often tall, I set an easy- 
to-find target as the start of the V on the left side. That corresponds to a 
full height drop. By that, I mean the lower portion of the table shows how 
often price will drop to the start of the V: 49% to 60%, depending on bull or 
bear markets. 

If you measure the height of the pattern from peak at the top of the V to 
the low at the start and multiply it by half, two, or three times the height and 
subtract the height from the pattern’s high, you can see how often price will 
reach the target on average. 

For example, if you use half the pattern’s height as a target, the stock will 
drop to the target nearly all of the time (95% to 98%). It also means that the 
extension is probably located just above the target. 

Short. If you’re willing to risk a short sale, then I would place an order to 
short if the low price drops below the bottom of the extension (or even place 


Sample Trade 1129 


Table 72.10 
Trading Tactics 


Trading Tactic Explanation 


Measure rule The measure rule target is the left side bottom of the V. The bottom 
portion of the table shows how often various heights work in the 
measure rule. 


Short For experienced traders: Place an order to sell short a penny below 
the bottom, right side of the V (as soon as you know an extension 
is forming). 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 

Percentage reaching half height target 95% 98% 

Percentage reaching bottom start of V 49% 60% 

Percentage reaching 2x height 12% 21% 

Percentage reaching 3x height 2% 7% 


it when the stock is near the top of the extension). That way, the order will get 
you into the trade at a good price. 

For the exit, if you can figure out when price is about to rise (at the end of 
the trade), then cover your short and hope it’s below the entry price. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 72.4 shows a trade Stan made. He completed checking the company’s 
fundamentals and checked charts on the health of the metals the company sells 
to make money. He was confident that the stock would continue to decline and 
be worth the risk of a trade. 

Price climbed from A to B and retraced to C. “When the V-top grew an 
extension [C to D)], that’s when I decided to trade the pattern.” 

For grins, he computed whether this was a short or tall, narrow or wide 
pattern. The high at B was 14.90 and the low at A was 12.18 for a height of 
2.72. The breakout price was the low at C, or 13.51. That gave the height-to- 
breakout price ratio of 20.1%. So the pattern was short (bad) according to the 
median in Table 72.5. 

The start of the V was on 11 September 2018 and the end of the exten- 
sion was 3 October 2018 for a width of 25 days. Narrow is good. A pattern both 
short and narrow according to Table 72.5 is second-to-worst performance of 
the four combinations. That’s not ideal, and it implies a higher risk trade. 

The measure rule target is the left side of the V, or 12.18 (A). The half- 
height target would be 14.90 — 2.72/2 or 13.54. The low at point C (13.51) is 
below the half-height target, so that’s no help. 


1130 V-Tops, Extended 


Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold B (FCX) 


rm -20 
1 i -19 
Wish og , : 
if ; hy ® 18 
Wa we ri ‘ a 
th. ft \" Wy ‘a = 16 
r B 


hy ih 


18 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19_ Feb Mar 


Figure 72.4 Stan uses lower highs to exit this extended V-top trade. 


He set the bottom of the V as his target and shorted the stock at a price 
of 13.50, or a penny below C. 

The trade began on bar D when the stock made an intraday low below C. 

As the days ticked past, he watched the stock move lower. At the circled 
area, the stock ran into support and moved sideways for several days. That 
sideways move might be a corrective phase of a measured move down. That’s 
the high in the extension (above D at 14.28) to the low in the correct phase 
at the start (12.51) subtracted from the high in the corrective phase (13.47) 
to give the 11.70 target. (The high at candle F is at 11.71, a penny above 
the target.) 

“I decided to cancel my order to close out the trade at the target [the 
price of the low at A] and instead to let it ride.” 

A strong downtrend developed. 

As price dropped out of the corrective phase (circled area), each price 
bar’s high was below the prior bar’s high. “I knew to wait three price bars 
[to assure a strong trend] before acting” on this feature. 

After the third bar showed a lower high, he placed a trailing stop a penny 
above the prior bar’s high and lowered it as the next bar appeared. 

At G, the stock touched his trailing stop and closed out the trade at 
11.72 for a gain of $1.78 or 13% in about 3 weeks. Using this technique of 
trailing the stop lower, he was able to exit at a more favorable price (11.72 
versus 12.18). 


73 


Wedges, Falling 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A downward price spiral bounded by two converging, down-sloping 
trendlines. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Intermediate-term bullish Short-term 
continuation bullish reversal 
Performance rank 31 out of 39 12 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 26% 24% 
Average rise 38% 26% 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Throwbacks 62% 61% 
Percentage meeting 62% 53% 
price target 
Synonym Descending wedges 
See also Pennants 


1131 


1132 Wedges, Falling 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish continuation 
Performance rank 27 out of 36 
Breakeven failure rate 29% 
Average drop 14% 
Volume trend Downward 
Pullbacks 74% 
Percentage meeting price target 29% 


The Results Snapshot shows the important numbers for falling wedges. When 
compared to other chart patterns, the failure-rate rank (not shown) is very high 
(bad). Bear markets, for example, rank 19 out of 20, where a rank of 1 is a pat- 
tern with the fewest failures. 

The average rise or decline is also unexciting with mid-to-lower-list per- 
formance. Coupled with their rare appearance and the difficulty in spotting 
these patterns in the bush, falling wedges are beasts you probably will not want 
to trade. Still, they can come in as handy as metric wrenches to a mechanic. 

I did a frequency distribution of the breakout distance to the wedge apex 
and found that the best performers in bull markets had upward breakouts 50% 
to 80% of the way to the apex, with rises averaging 42%. 

However, even though a falling wedge may have a breakout 60% of the 
way to the apex, it does not mean you will see a 42% rise. Since we are dealing 
with probabilities, anything can happen (including you doing even better), but 
the statistics suggest a more powerful move. 

The percentage meeting the price target (that is, the measure rule) for 
upward breakouts uses the highest high in the wedge as the target—an easy 
objective because there’s no calculation involved, but the stock will struggle 
to meet it. 

For downward breakouts, I use the pattern’s height subtracted from the 
breakout price. That method is why downward breakouts rarely hit their tar- 
gets (just 29% do). Cut the height in half and subtract it from the breakout 
price and it’ll boost the success rate to 47%. That’s still not great. 


Tour 
Figure 73.1 shows a falling wedge bounded by two down-sloping trendlines 


in the middle of the chart. Price made a new low in late July and bounced 
upward. The upward momentum did not carry quite as far as the prior swing. 


Identification Guidelines 1133 


Delta Air Lines Inc (Air Transport, NYSE, DAL) 


i Mf 


Wh We Mey yi i | 3 
| Ah uy Who 


a 
i 


Apr 92 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 73.1 A falling wedge bounded by two down-sloping trendlines. 


Another up-and-down swing occurred during mid-August just before price 
finally reached a new low. 

If you draw a trendline along the bottoms of the minor lows and another 
along the tops, you see the familiar shape of a falling wedge. 

Falling wedges are rare patterns that have price movements bounded by 
two down-sloping and converging trendlines. When drawn on the chart, the 
picture looks like a pie slice tilted downward. I’m getting hungry for a pecan 
pie, but I digress. 

Once price breaks out upward, it rises and quickly climbs above the top 
of the pattern in well-behaved wedges. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 73.1 shows identification guidelines. I don’t know what itis about wedges, 
but they are a pain to find. Let’s go through the identification guidelines. 

Appearance. As mentioned before, two trendlines outline the price 
action. Both trendlines slope downward, with the top trendline having a 
steeper slope than the bottom one. That forces the lines to converge. 

Eventually, the two trendlines intersect at the wedge apex. You can see 
this in the wedge pictured in Figure 73.2. This wedge forms as part of a 
consolidation pattern in an uptrend. Price bounces from one trendline to 
the other several times before breaking out of the narrowing price pattern 
in mid-June. 


1134 Wedges, Falling 


Table 73.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Draw two trendlines, one along the minor highs and one along the 


minor lows. The trendlines must both slope downward and even- 
tually converge. Price should cross the pattern from top to bottom 
several times, filling the space with price movement. 

Multiple touches |= Wedges should have at least five touches, three along one side 
and two along the other. Be skeptical of wedges with fewer than 
five touches. 

Volume Volume usually trends downward until the breakout. 

Breakout direction, Price can break out either upward or downward, but is usually 

confirmation upward. A breakout happens when price closes outside of the 

trendline boundary. 

Duration A falling wedge has a minimum duration of 3 weeks. Anything less is 
probably a pennant. Wedges rarely exceed 4 months long. 


Boatmens Bancshares (Bank, NASDAQ, BOAT) 
- 34 


a -33 


{il -32 
l 


| 
il a Het 
Wn 


lt! 
yt! 


lh 


Feb 93 Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 73.2 A falling wedge with six trendline touches. Several alternating 
touches of the trendlines are needed to form a reliable falling wedge. 


Multiple touches. I usually regard five touches as the minimum necessary 
to safeguard a good chart pattern. The reason for the multiple touches is that 
the price pattern creates several minor highs and minor lows, each succeeding 
one narrower than the last. Having a five-touch minimum prevents a price pat- 
tern that resembles a rise and gradual decline from being labeled as a wedge. 


Focus on Failures 1135 


There needs to be several opposing touches of the trendline as price pro- 
gresses through the wedge. For example, the figure shows six touches of the 
trendlines, each of which occurs on the opposite side of the previous touch 
(but need not alternate). 

Look for at least three touches of one trendline and two on the other, all 
of them as minor highs or minor lows. Cutting through price doesn’t count 
as a touch. The stock should cross the wedge from top to bottom, filling the 
whitespace with price movement. 

Down-sloping trendlines outlining the minor highs and lows are another 
key to correct identification of a falling wedge. Avoid a horizontal or near- 
horizontal bottom trendline because the formation is most likely a descending 
triangle. For a falling wedge, both trendlines must slope downward. 

Volume trend. The volume trend is usually downward. This is not an 
inviolate rule; it is only a guideline that usually rings true. 

Breakout direction, confirmation. The breakout can be upward or 
downward, and it happens when price closes outside of the trendline bound- 
ary. In this example, price breaks out upward in mid-June and reaches the ulti- 
mate high in early October. The rise, at 17% from the breakout, is well below 
average. 

Duration. The wedge should have a minimum duration of 3 weeks, and 
seldom does it last longer than 4 or 5 months. The wedges in this study, for 
example, have durations from 3 weeks to about 11 months. Durations shorter 
than 3 weeks are probably pennants (if they have a flagpole). 

Why do falling wedges act as they do? About half of the wedges act as 
consolidations of the prevailing price trend. Like the wedge shown in the fig- 
ure, price is heading upward when it runs into turbulence. Investors pause from 
their buying spree and sit on the sidelines. Price retraces its rise by creating the 
wedge, oscillating in ever-narrowing spirals until buying enthusiasm resumes. 

Volume shows this lack of enthusiasm when it recedes. When buying 
momentum resumes, price and volume shoot upward again after the breakout. 

Think of a falling wedge not as a pattern of weakness, but one of strength, 
like a spring winding tighter and tighter. As a spring tightens, it shrinks, and so 
do price and volume in the falling wedge. During a breakout, the pent-up force 
releases and price bursts through the pattern’s boundary and zooms upward 
(or downward). 


Focus on Failures 
Like many chart patterns, falling wedges suffer from 5% failures (see Figure 73.3). 


Although not shown on the chart, price began rising in early December 1994. 
During creation of the chart pattern, price moved lower in a narrowing channel. 


1136 Wedges, Falling 


ASA Ltd (Investment Co (Domestic), NYSE, ASA) 


Throwback 


Mh | 


High - 46 


an 

h Mi f 
i | 

| aly fr 


| ) 
i Iu] I WI, | | 
| 1 1D idle -43 
I ! Lagu | i Wy " 


ht ‘I 


Mar 95 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 73.3. An example of a falling wedge 5% failure. Price does not move more 
than 5% above the breakout point before heading down again. 


After the breakout, price climbed and reached a high of 45.38, less than 
5% above the breakout price of 43.25. From the high, price headed down and 
fell to a low in late October of 36.38. The inability of price to continue rising 
more than 5% after the breakout constituted a 5% failure. 

The causes of 5% failures can be many. Overhead resistance, as in this 
case, blocked the upward rise, so be sure to check for resistance before trading. 
For downward breakouts, look for nearby underlying support that may halt 
a decline. 

Other causes may include a sharp drop in the stock market—that can keep an 
industry down for months (think of airline stocks after the tragedy of September 
11, 2001, or during the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020). Certainly, a switch from 
bull markets to bear markets will tend to keep high-flying stocks cruising at a 
lower altitude, but even a short decline in the market can cause havoc. 

Rising commodity prices can affect the stock market, too. For example, 
natural gas and oil prices affect airlines, chemicals, utilities, oil companies, oil 
service companies, refiners, and so on. 

The Federal Reserve raising interest rates to slow the economy may push 
it into a recession. The prospect of rising rates is never a good omen for stocks, 
and they often react badly to the news. 

After you enter a trade, do you cash out quickly, savoring a short-term 
profit? Do you hold on for the long term and weather the loss? The answer to 
these questions you should know before trading. Switching your attitude to a 
long-term holding as price drops in a short-term trade is a game best left to ama- 
teurs. They are the ones who ride a position down and sell just before it bottoms. 


Statistics 1137 


Statistics 


Table 73.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 1,168 wedges in my house and called the exter- 
minator. They were in 651 stocks with the first found in July 1991 and the 
most recent in December 2018. Not all stocks covered the entire range, and 
some no longer trade. Because bear markets with downward breakouts were 
below the minimum threshold for this edition, they are not included in the 
statistics. Those are the ones the exterminator handled. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Wedges split almost 
evenly between reversals and continuations of the price trend. Bull markets 
tended to see a few more patterns act as continuations. Bear markets favored 
reversals. 

Reversal/continuation performance. There’s not a lot of difference 
between reversal and continuation performance in this chart pattern. 

Average rise or decline. The average rise and decline are below the 
average performance of all chart pattern types. Today’s headline: This chart 
pattern underperforms. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Notice the effect the market has on the 
average rise or decline. When the market and breakout direction agree (bull 
market, upward breakout), the average rise tends to be larger than the coun- 
tertrend move (bear market, upward breakout). That would be clearer with the 
missing bear market, down breakout column. 

Days to ultimate high or low. The rise in bear markets is 30% faster 
than the rise in bull markets (you find that by taking the ratio of gain to time). 
The downward breakout in bull markets drops at the same speed as the bull 
market rises. In other chart patterns, we see bear market velocity about twice 
as fast as in bull markets. 


Table 73.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


Bear Market, 
Up Breakout 


Bull Market, 
Down Breakout 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence 


Reversal, continuation 
performance 


Average rise or decline 


Standard & Poor’s 500 
change 


Days to ultimate high or low 
How many change trend? 


583 


49% R, 51% C 


38% R, 39% C 
38% 


10% 
160 
46% 


176 


52% R, 48% C 


27% R, 25% C 
26% 


2% 
82 
47% 


277 


42% R, 58% C 


-13% R, -14% C 
-14% 


-1% 
59 
27% 


1138 Wedges, Falling 


How many change trend? This is a count of how many wedges see price 
move more than 20% after the breakout. For upward breakouts, I like to see 
values above 50%, but wedges can’t meet that benchmark (but two columns 
come close). Even downward breakouts fall short of the average posted by 
other chart pattern types. 

What does this mean? Let me tell you. I was hoping this row would sepa- 
rate patterns that trend from those that do not. Perhaps it does. We already 
know that wedges underperform, so this is another statistic that confirms that 
poor performance. 

Table 73.3 shows failure rates for falling wedges. The best performance 
(fewest breakeven failures) comes from wedges in bear markets with upward 
breakouts (which is odd because it’s a countertrend move). Even so, 24% of 
wedges failed to see price rise more than 5%. Notice how small the sample 
counts are. Hmm. Maybe that explains the lower failure rate. 

Here’s another example: 38% of wedges failed to see price rise more 
than 10%. Notice that at this level, bull markets have a slightly smaller 
failure rate, 37%. The two columns argue over which has the lower failure 
rate as you scan down the list. Bull markets with upward breakouts eventually 
win, though. 

Here’s how to use this table. Suppose you find a falling wedge that peaks 
at 15 and spirals down to 10, where price breaks out upward in bull markets. 
Since the measure rule says to expect a climb back up to the top of the wedge, 
what are the chances of that happening? 

Aclimb from 10 to 15 is 50%, and the table shows that 76% fail to climb 
above that. Thus, the measure rule is too optimistic, and price is unlikely to 
reach the top of the pattern before tumbling more than 20%. 


Table 73.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 

Maximum Price Rise Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
or Decline (%) Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 150 or 26% 42 or 24% 81 or 29% 
10 63 or 37% 25 or 38% 59 or 51% 
15 69 or 48% 18 or 48% 43 or 66% 
20 32 or 54% 8 or 53% 18 or 73% 
25 27 or 58% 16 or 62% 18 or 79% 
30 25 or 63% 12 or 69% 24 or 88% 
35 26 or 67% 8 or 73% 15 or 93% 
50 53 or 76% 19 or 84% 13 or 98% 
75 59 or 86% 15 or 93% 6 or 100% 


Over 75 79 or 100% 13 or 100% 0 or 100% 


Statistics 1139 


Table 73.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. The falling wedge favors upward breakouts as the 
table shows, but they occur most often in bull markets. 

Yearly position, performance. The numbers for this row have little con- 
sistency. Upward breakouts suggest you avoid those within a third of the yearly 
high. Downward breakouts dislike the middle third of the yearly price range. 

Apex distance. The median breakout occurs between 58% and 62% of 
the way to the apex. As I mentioned earlier, the most powerful upward break- 
outs in bull markets (only) occur between 50% and 80% of the way to the apex. 
Those falling within that range have rises that average 42%. I measured time 
using calendar days, not trading days, by the way. 


Table 73.4 
Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Breakout direction 68% up 57% up 32% down 
Performance of breakouts L 39%, L 27%, L-15%, 

occurring near the M 39%, M 26%, M -12%, 

12-month low (L), middle H 38% H 24% H -15% 

(M), or high (H) 
Median breakout 62% 58% 61% 

distance to apex 
Throwbacks/pullbacks 62% 61% 74% 


occurrence 


Average time to throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


4% in 5 days 


7% in 5 days 


-5% in 6 days 


Average time to throwback/ 11 days 12 days 12 days 
pullback ends 

Average rise/decline for 29% 19% -12% 
patterns with throw- 
backs/pullbacks 

Average rise/decline for 54% 37% -18% 
patterns without throw- 
backs/pullbacks 

Percentage price resumes 53% 44% 43% 
trend 

Performance with 53% 25% -14% 
breakout day gap 

Performance without 35% 27% -14% 
breakout day gap 

Average gap size $0.25 $0.29 $0.68 


1140 Wedges, Falling 


Throwbacks and pullbacks. In other chart patterns, throwbacks and 
pullbacks happen about 66% of the time, but upward breakouts fall short of 
that and downward breakouts exceed that. 

It takes about a dozen days for the stock to return to the breakout price 
on average. 

In all cases, throwbacks and pullbacks hurt performance when they occur. 
That’s typical for chart patterns, but what’s not typical are the differences in 
performance, which are quite large. 

After a throwback or pullback completes, it’s nearly random whether the 
stock will resume trending in the breakout direction. The uptrend resumes in 
bull markets but not in the other two columns. 

Gaps. Gaps in wedges don’t show a consistent performance trend either. 
They help performance in bull markets after upward breakouts, hurt perfor- 
mance in bear markets, and don’t care after downward breakouts. That covers 
all three possible combinations. 

Table 73.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones regardless of market 
conditions or breakout directions. To use this finding, measure the height of the 
wedge from highest peak to lowest valley and divide by the breakout price. If the 
result is larger than the median shown in the table, then you have a tall wedge. 

Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones. For reference, 
I used the median length to determine whether a wedge was narrow or wide. 
I provide those median values in the table for your viewing pleasure. 

Height and width combinations. Wedges both tall and wide outper- 
form across the table. This is surprising because falling wedges are one of the 


Table 73.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern performance 41% 34% -15% 

Short pattern performance 35% 18% -13% 
Median height as a percentage of 15.0% 22.6% 16.1% 

breakout price 

Narrow pattern performance 37% 20% -13% 

Wide pattern performance 40% 33% -15% 
Median width 38 days 36 days 45 days 
Short and narrow performance 35% 15% -13% 

Short and wide performance 36% 26% -13% 

Tall and wide performance 42% 35% -15% 


Tall and narrow performance 40% 32% -14% 


Statistics 1141 


few chart patterns to show no exceptions. You'll want to avoid trading short 
and narrow ones, too. 

Table 73.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. Most wedges have a receding volume trend. Don’t throw 
away a wedge just because volume trends upward in the pattern. Why? 

Rising/Falling volume. Answer: In bull markets, after upward breakouts, 
patterns with rising volume tend to outperform. The other two columns prefer 
falling volume, so check to be sure which column you're using. 

Breakout day volume. Heavy breakout volume propels the stock higher 
after upward breakouts, but light breakout volume works best for downward 
breakouts. That’s what the numbers tell me. 

Table 73.7 is supposed to show how often price reaches a stop location, 
but the method used to calculate stops doesn’t work with this chart pattern, 
so I removed it (the exterminator carried away the table, too, along with the 
bearish patterns). 

Table 73.8 shows performance over three decades. The bear markets of 
the 2000s were not included in the statistics. 


Table 73.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 

Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 72% down 70% down 75% down 
Rising volume trend 42% 22% -12% 

performance 
Falling volume trend 37% 28% -14% 

performance 
Heavy breakout volume 40% 31% -13% 

performance 
Light breakout volume 36% 19% -15% 

performance 

Table 73.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 34% -16% 
2000s 47% -11% 
2010s 32% -15% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 22% 25% 
2000s 25% 32% 


2010s 33% 30% 


1142 Wedges, Falling 


Performance over time. The 2000s showed the best performance 
(upward breakouts), and the other two decades were about even for perfor- 
mance. Downward breakouts showed the worst performance in the 2000s, and 
the other two decades were similar. 

That makes sense to me. If upward breakouts excel in the 2000s, then 
downward breakouts probably do worse. And that’s what we see. 

Failures over time. Upward breakouts show failures increasing over 
time but downward breakouts show a mix. 

Table 73.9 shows busted pattern performance. 

Busted patterns count. As poor as wedges perform, I would expect to 
see higher bust counts (like 40% to 50%). 

Busted occurrence. I sorted the busts into how many times they busted. 
We see single busts happening most often followed by double busts (in two 
columns) or triple+ busts (meaning more than two busts) after downward 
breakouts. 

Busted and non-busted performance. In two of three columns, busted 
patterns outperform their non-busted counterparts. If you see a falling wedge 
with a busted downward breakout, then look for nearby (within 10% or so) 
overhead resistance. If you find none or a small amount, then consider buying 
the stock. If it single busts, the rise averages 53%, which is large enough that 
maybe you can grab part of it. The number is an average of perfect trades, so 
keep that in mind. 

Note that for a downward breakout to bust, price has to drop no more 
than 10% below the bottom of the wedge and then close above the top of 
it. To clear the top of the wedge, that often means a big rise. I measured the 
53% average rise from the top of the wedge (not the upward breakout) to the 
ultimate high. 


Table 73.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns count 182 or 31% 42 or 24% 89 or 32% 
Single bust count 88 or 48% 26 or 62% 63 or 71% 
Double bust count 72 or 40% 10 or 24% 3 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 22 or 12% 6 or 14% 23 or 26% 
Performance for all -15% -17% 39% 
busted patterns 
Single busted performance -21% -23% 53% 


Non-busted performance -14% -20% 38% 


Trading Tactics 1143 


Trading Tactics 


Table 73.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. For upward breakouts, the target price is the 
highest high in the wedge. For downward breakouts, calculate the height of 
the wedge from tallest peak to lowest valley and subtract the height from the 
breakout price. If the target is below zero, then ignore it. If the target is a large 
percentage away, then price will likely miss the target. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often price reaches the full 
height target. For downward breakouts, you might want to divide the height in 
half before subtracting it from the breakout price. If you do that, price reaches 
the target 47% of the time. That’s still not great. 

Once you have a target picked, compute the percentage distance between 
the target and the current price. Then use Table 73.3 to determine how likely 
it'll be for price to exceed the target. 

For example, if the target is $5 away from a current price of 50, that’s a 
10% move. In bull markets, after upward breakouts, Table 73.3 says that 37% 
of wedges will fail to drop more than 10%. If you’re a glass-half-full person, 
then that leaves 63% of patterns will reach the target. 

Figure 73.4 shows an example of how this works. The highest price is 
just as the formation starts in early June at 48.63, and it becomes the tar- 
get price. After the breakout, price hesitates and attempts a throwback to the 
wedge trendline, but cannot quite reach it. After that, it is straight up. 


Table 73.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule For upward breakouts, the highest high in the wedge is the price 


target. For downward breakouts, use the formation height 
subtracted from the breakout price as the target. The lower 
portion of the table shows how often this works. 


Buy after breakout Since price can break out in any direction, wait for a close outside 
the trendline boundary before taking a position. 
Watch for dip A substantial number of wedges break out downward but turn 
up and make a large rise. 
Busted trade See Table 73.9 for guidance. 
Bull Market, Bear Market, Bull Market, 
Description Up Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout 


Percentage reaching 
full height target 62% 53% 29% 


1144 Wedges, Falling 


Arco Chemical Co (Chemical (Basic), NYSE, RCM) 
-51 


th 


Target 


pil 


- 50 
| f a -49 
MW, = 


| 
i I. 


-47 


-46 
Attempted Throwback 
-45 


| 
ih ugh 
| | 
| al 


i} 


Apr 94 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 


Figure 73.4 The highest price in the wedge becomes the target price to which 
the stock will climb at a minimum. 


Price reaches the target in early August. The old high is a place of resist- 
ance, and it takes about 2 weeks before price is able to push decidedly above 
that level. Price moves higher until hitting 51 before stumbling and entering 
an extended downtrend. 

Buy after breakout. Two out of every three (68%) wedges break out 
upward in bull markets, but you may stumble upon one that breaks out down- 
ward. Wait for price to close outside the trendline boundary to signal the 
breakout. Only then should you trade the wedge, and with such poor perfor- 
mance you may be wise to skip the trade entirely. You may run into a dip, too. 
They are painful. 

Watch for dip. As I was researching wedges, I noticed an interesting 
quirk. Sometimes price drops below the bottom trendline, circles around, and 
then rises. Figure 73.6 shows an example of this behavior. In early January, 
price breaks out downward, circles around, and then moves higher. 

Sometimes the downward breakout takes the form of a premature down- 
ward breakout. Price might drop below the trendline for a few days and then 
reenter the wedge only to zoom out the other side and stage an upward break- 
out. In either case, the real action is upward. Over a quarter (27%) of all falling 
wedges show this momentary downward spin. 

Busted trade. As I mentioned in the discussion of Table 73.9, busted 
downward breakouts can be profitable trades. Just remember that price has to 
close above the top of the wedge to bust the downward breakout. The results 
you see in that table are for many perfect trades. 


Experience 1145 


Experience 


Let me tell you about what I found in my trade review. 


Millennium Pharmaceuticals 


I only traded a falling wedge once from the sell side. That was in Millennium 
Pharmaceuticals (MLNM) in 2005.1 bought a rounding bottom (or descend- 
ing scallop) after price started moving up. 

Instead of rising the stock reversed and formed a falling wedge. From my 
notebook: “Sell reason: This broke out downward from a falling wedge, so it 
was time to leave. The stop was too far away on this one, initially. Coupled with 
bad timing on the sale .. . ugh.” 

The wedge saw price curl around the apex and move higher after I sold. 
As I mentioned, this dip happens sometimes, but not before taking 12% 
of my money. 


¢ Lesson: The initial stop was placed 14% away from the buy price, 
which was too far. The adverse breakout from the falling wedge nar- 
rowed the loss somewhat but it was still too far away. 


Ben and Jerrys A 


On the buy side, I took a position in Ben and Jerrys A (BJICA) in late 
1999 after the stock formed a falling wedge. This one had the same curl as 
I just described for MLNM except I bought when price was rebounding 
after it rose past the apex. The stock climbed for a week and then started 
heading lower. It made a strong drop, pushing price back below the apex 
when I sold. 

My notes say this was a perfect entry and exit. I executed it well, and price 
just didn’t cooperate. That happens. 


¢ Lesson: Even well-executed trades fail. It’s the cost of doing business, 
and traders have to become accustomed to having losing trades. 


Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold 


Figure 73.5 shows a trade I made in Freeport-McMoRan Copper and 
Gold (FCX) in 1999. The stock completed a falling wedge (A). At B, the 
stock broke out upward, and I grabbed it the same day, receiving a fill at 
5.25. Within a week, the stock had thrown back to the breakout price and 
bottomed at C. 


1146 Wedges, Falling 


Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold B (FCX) 


Pool 


= ee 
ull D th, wh I ' 
\, 7 ® N | l 


7 


a 


98 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan99 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 73.5 This falling wedge trade made 51%. 


Then it made a strong push higher to D. I don’t have a reason to explain 
this strong upward move. It could have been an earnings release that was bet- 
ter than expected, or it could have been something else. 

Regardless, the stock retraced and formed a very nice-looking flag, 
E. The flag broke out upward. 

I calculated a price target. The low at C was 4.88 and the high at D was 
7.09 for a flagpole height of 2.21. I added this to the bottom of the flag, E (6.41), 
to get a target of 8.62 (H). 

The stock reached the target at F, and I sold the next day, G, but only 
received a fill at 8.00. I made 51% on the trade. 

I entered on the breakout, sold the day after the stock reached the tar- 
get, and made a bundle. This is how falling wedges are supposed to work but 
rarely do. 


Sample Trade 


Clint is the CEO of a small company that specializes in software for cham- 
bers of commerce. It is a cutthroat business because market growth is limited. 
The only way to increase revenue is to take business away from a competitor 
or eat them. Once a company entrenches itself within a chamber, it is almost 
impossible to pry them loose. But Clint has had some success because of the 
breadth of his offerings and some skilled marketing ploys. 

When Clint is not worrying about his business or pitching his wares to 
prospective customers, he plays the stock market hoping to make enough extra 
income to someday buy out his closest competitor. He added multimedia to 
his demo, and that’s what alerted him to the company shown in Figure 73.6. 


Sample Trade 1147 


Autodesk Inc (Computer Software & Svcs., NASDAQ, ADSK) 


——e zi 
i t Mf | | nl ith ‘i 3 
7 it " Mt hy , Wh] \ “S 

a Stock Bought - : 

ue i iM 

Head] uae : : 

Oct 95 Nov Dec Jan 96 Feb Wie pas 


Figure 73.6 More than one-fourth of falling wedges drop below the bottom 
trendline and then quickly turn up and head higher. A small head-and-shoulders 
bottom appears as price swings around the apex. 


Clint watched the stock stumble and then saw the falling wedge form. 
He hoped that the new chart pattern marked the limit of the downward move 
and that he could buy in at a good price with a mouthwatering chance of price 
rising to the old high. 

When the stock punched through the bottom wedge trendline, he waited 
to see what price would do next. It curled around and made a mini-head-and- 
shoulders bottom. He penciled in a neckline joining the armpits between the 
two shoulders, which followed the slope of the lower wedge trendline. 

Once price pushed above the neckline and above the wedge apex, 
“T placed an order to buy. It filled at 30.” Clint’s timing was excellent. Two days 
after he bought, price was already in the mid-thirties and climbing. He saw 
price go horizontal in mid-February through March and wondered if this was 
the corrective phase of a measured move up chart pattern. That is the way he 
decided to play it. 

The base of the measured move was at the head, 27.75, and the top of 
the corrective phase was at 38.50. The height was the difference between the 
two or 10.75. Projecting the height upward from the corrective phase bottom 
of 33.50 gave him a target of 44.25. He phoned his broker and placed a limit 
order to sell his holdings at that price. 

In mid-April the stock left the corrective phase and started climbing 
again on the second leg up. In late April, an e-mail message from his broker 
told him price reached his target, and the stock sold at 44.25. In the days that 
followed, he smiled at his luck. Not only did he hit the high exactly, but the 
stock tumbled below 30 by the start of July. 


74 


Wedges, Rising 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: An upward price spiral bounded by two converging, up-sloping trendlines. 


Upward Breakouts 


Bull Market 


Reversal or continuation Long-term bullish continuation 


Performance rank 32 out of 39 
Breakeven failure rate 19% 
Average rise 38% 
Volume trend Downward 
Throwbacks 72% 
Percentage meeting price target 63% 
Synonym Ascending wedges 
See also Pennants 
Downward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Short-term Short-term 
bearish reversal bearish reversal 
Performance rank 36 (last) out of 36 19 (last) out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 51% 28% 
Average drop 9% 17% 


1148 


Tour 1149 


Bull Market Bear Market 
Volume trend Downward Downward 
Pullbacks 72% 70% 
Percentage meeting price target 32% 42% 


I received an e-mail asking if the S&P 500 index was making a rising wedge. 
I pulled up the chart and, sure enough, the wedge was as plain as day and 
almost a year long. In my daily review of stock charts, I missed finding this one. 
That is the major problem with wedges, whether rising or falling. You cannot 
find them. Not only are they rare, but also their spiraling price action seems 
hidden in a historical price series. A few stand out and shout “rising wedge,” 
like the ones shown in the figures accompanying this chapter, but most remain 
hidden like a raindrop joining a pond. 

The Results Snapshot gives you the bad news. Rising wedges are lousy 
performers. Downward breakouts rank dead last for performance, both in bull 
and bear markets. Can you imagine a pattern where half of them (51%) will fail 
to see price drop more than 5%? That’s alarming. 

Are there no redeeming qualities? Yes, there are. Downward break- 
outs that bust in bull markets might be worth a look. We’ll discuss that later. 
But first, let’s take a tour so we know what to avoid. 


Tour 


Figure 74.1 shows an example of a rising wedge. Price started a slow climb, 
like stairs going up, in October. The minor highs bounced off a trendline 


Avery Dennison Corp (Chemical (Specialty), NYSE, AVY) — 32 
Attempted -31 
/, Palback l \ lh | 
(ee -s 
fl i h i hy ih 

29 

I L | th I i 

Il Hi i 
, — 
- 26 
-25 
-24 
- 23 
Sep 93 Oct Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 74.1 A rising wedge with two up-sloping trendlines. The volume trend 
usually slopes downward. 


1150 Wedges, Rising 


drawn along the peaks connecting them. On the bottom, an up-sloping trend 
supported the minor lows. The entire pattern saw price moving higher but 
forming a needle or wedge shape. The receding volume trend bolstered the 
case that the pattern was indeed a rising wedge. 

During mid-December, price did not break down out of the wedge so 
much as just meander lower. There was high volume on December 16, which 
probably marked the actual breakout, but it only lasted 1 day. 

Price attempted a pullback to the lower wedge trendline but did not quite 
make it. Price moved lower, recovered to post a new high, and then withdrew 
to make another minor low during April before zipping higher. 

Notice how price crossed the pattern from top to bottom several times, 
and how the pattern raises a wall of worry as price climbs, getting narrower 
and narrower until it’s forced to break out in one direction or the other. 


Identification Guidelines 


Rising and falling wedges are among the most difficult chart patterns to find. 
However, there are some guidelines that can make identification easier, and 
Table 74.1 lists them. 

Rising wedges can form anywhere. You might expect them to form at the 
end of a long uptrend and that is indeed the case most of the time. Occasion- 
ally, price is heading downward and a rising wedge forms as a retrace against 
the downward trend. After the breakout, price resumes falling. 


Table 74.1 
Identification Guidelines 
Characteristic Discussion 
Appearance Draw two trendlines, one along the minor highs and one along 


the minor lows. The trendlines must both slope upward 
and converge. 


Multiple touches Well-formed rising wedges have price touching the two trendlines 
at least 5 times (three on one side and two on the other). The 
touches should be at minor highs or minor lows, not when price 
slices through a trendline. 


Whitespace Price must cross the wedge from top to bottom plenty of times, 
filling the pattern with price movement, and not leaving a lot of 
whitespace behind. 


Volume Volume usually trends downward throughout the wedge. 


Breakout direction Can break out in any direction when price closes outside the trend- 
line boundary. 


Duration A rising wedge has a minimum duration of 3 weeks. Anything less 
is a pennant, provided it is attached to a flagpole. Wedges rarely 
exceed 3 or 4 months long. 


Identification Guidelines 1151 


Appearance. Refer to the rising wedges pictured in Figure 74.2 as I dis- 
cuss the guidelines. You probably first notice the up-sloping trendlines. Both 
trendlines in the wedge must slope upward, and no near-horizontal trendlines 
are allowed (a horizontal top trendline indicates an ascending triangle). 

Price moves upward, forming higher highs and higher lows, but two 
trendlines bound the price action and converge. Rarely does price move out- 
side the two trendlines until the final breakout. 

Multiple touches. A well-formed rising wedge has multiple touches of 
the trendline boundaries. The figure shows the touches labeled 1 through 5. 
Fewer than five touches, three on one side and two on the other, should cast 
the wedge in a dim light. It might not be a rising wedge at all. Each trendline 
touch should be a minor high or minor low. If price slides through a trendline, 
then that location does not count as a touch. 

In the figure, you’ll notice that neither of the breakouts from the wedges 
qualify as a trendline touch. 

Whitespace. You'll want to see price crossing the pattern from top to 
bottom plenty of times to cover the whitespace with price movement. Having 
too much whitespace means you made an identification mistake. 

Volume. A receding volume trend is another element common to most 
rising wedges. Volume trends downward and becomes especially low just 
before the breakout. However, this is not an absolute rule. 

If you suspect a wedge is forming but it has a rising volume trend, then 
ignore the volume trend. Review the other guidelines (especially the number 


Fed Ex (FDX Corporation) (Air Transport, NYSE, FDX) 


i! 


Apex 


| 
| | 
\ : 
W Iv: ‘ 


99 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan0O Feb Mar 


Figure 74.2 Shown are two rising wedges with at least five touches of the two 
trendlines. 


1152 Wedges, Rising 


of touches and whitespace) to make sure the chart pattern resembles a rising 
wedge. If there is doubt, do not invest until the stock breaks out of the chart 
pattern. Not trading a wedge until after the breakout is almost always a wise 
course of action for many types of chart patterns. 

Breakout direction. Price can break out in any direction but is down- 
ward most of the time. A breakout happens when price closes outside of the 
trendline boundary. 

Duration. A rising wedge takes time to form. Price makes new minor 
highs and minor lows as it bounces from trendline to trendline. It takes over 
3 weeks for the formation to take on the wedge appearance. Patterns shorter 
than 3 weeks are usually pennants provided they hang off flagpoles (I wonder 
if their fingers get tired from hanging on). 

‘Typically, the apex—where the two trendlines meet—marks the end of the 
wedge. Price usually breaks out about two-thirds of the way to the apex (in calen- 
dar days, not trading days). Rising wedges rarely last more than 3 months, but be 
flexible. If you use the weekly scale to look for wedges, you'll likely find long ones. 


Focus on Failures 


With poor measure rule performance and a small average rise or decline, 
it should come as little surprise that rising wedges have failure rates higher 
than other chart pattern types. Consider Figure 74.3, a 5% failure in a rising 
wedge. Price that drops by less than 5% before moving significantly higher 
I calla 5% failure. 


Georgia Pacific Corp (Paper & Forest Products, NYSE, GP) _ 82 


Oct 94 Nov Dec Jan 95 Feb Mar 


Figure 74.3. An example of a rising wedge 5% failure. Price fails to move down 
by more than 5% before rebounding. 


Statistics 1153 


The wedge forms after a downward price move of nearly 2 months’ 
duration. The wedge appears to be an upward retrace in a short-term down- 
ward price trend. That’s good for a downward breakout. It means price is 
likely to drop. 

In the wedge, price moves up, touches the top trendline, and then bounces 
to the bottom. Price crosses from top to bottom as it rises and forms a narrow- 
ing price channel, just as we expect to see in a wedge. 

Price drops out of the wedge 68% of the way to the apex in this example, 
right where you would expect it to. Volume is unusual because it trends upward 
but begins receding the week before the breakout. It is exceptionally low just 
before the downward breakout. 

Once price closes below the lower trendline, investors usually sell, help- 
ing drive price down. However, volume is low on this breakout. Price need not 
have high volume to recede; sometimes it can fall on its own weight. 

If you shorted the stock after the downward breakout, you would have 
visited the woodshed for punishment, not because you did something wrong. 
Rather, because price turned around and headed higher. In less than 2 weeks, 
price climbed above the wedge top. In another 3 months, price finally broke 
out of its consolidation zone and really began climbing. In July, it reached a 
new high of over 95. 

This rising wedge did not act as a continuation pattern (although techni- 
cally it was). Rather, price fell into the pattern and turned higher just as the 
wedge formed. Even though the breakout was downward, the stock continued 
rising. 


Statistics 


Table 74.2 shows general statistics for rising wedges. 


Table 74.2 
General Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


Bull Market, 
Down Breakout 


Bear Market, 
Down Breakout 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) 


occurrence 


582 


31% R, 69% C 


888 


69% R, 31% C 


231 


56% R, 44% C 


Reversal, continuation 


performance 38% R, 38% C -8% R,-11% C -16%R, -18% C 
Average rise or decline 38% -9% -17% 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change 13% -2% -9% 
Days to ultimate high orlow 256 31 39 


How many change trend? 51% 15% 32% 


1154 Wedges, Rising 


Number found. The hunt for rising wedges over the decades found 
1,820 patterns in 774 stocks with the first one located in July 1991 and the 
most recent in April 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire period, and some 
stocks no longer trade. I removed upward breakouts in bear markets because 
of too few samples. 

Reversal (R), continuation (C) occurrence. Downward breakouts acted 
as reversals most often but upward breakouts favored continuations. That makes 
sense, doesn’t it? (If price rises into the pattern, an upward breakout would be a 
continuation of that uptrend. A downward breakout would be a reversal). 

Reversal/continuation performance. Mapping performance of pat- 
terns that acted as reversals or continuations shows that for downward break- 
outs, continuations outperformed reversals. 

You might think that’s obvious because of the saying, “trade with the 
trend.” However, reversals outperform continuations after upward breakouts 
and continuations beat reversals after downward breakouts (for all chart pat- 
tern types). 

Average rise or decline. The best performance comes from wedges that 
follow the market trend—upward breakouts in bull markets and downward 
breakouts in bear markets. Stick with those directions for trading and avoid the 
countertrend wedges, the ones that break out against the market trend. That’s 
good advice for any chart pattern type. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The index climbed or dropped the 
most in step with wedges that climbed or dropped the most. The best results 
occur in the trend-following columns, and the worst results in the counter- 
trend columns. 

Days to ultimate high or low. Downward breakouts see price bottom in 
about a month. Upward breakouts take considerably longer, about 8.5 months. 

Here’s one of the few joys I get from writing this book and that is to check 
the velocity of up and down breakouts. I compared the bull market numbers 
and found that downward breakouts see price drop twice as fast as it rises. 
Comparing downward breakouts in bull and bear markets, we see that bear 
markets see price drop 50% faster than bull markets. Way cool. 

How many change trend? This is a measure of how many wedges see 
price move more than 20% after the breakout. I like to see bull market, upward 
breakout values over 50%, and the rising wedge qualifies. Downward breakout 
performance places dead last. It suggests you'll want to avoid shorting a wedge 
having a downward breakout (or avoid selling a long holding). Of course, your 
results may vary. 

Table 74.3 shows failure rates for rising wedges, and it’s not a pretty 
sight. You might want to avert your eyes. 

Wedges in bull markets with upward breakouts have the lowest failure 
rates. That finding may sound odd because rising wedges are supposed to break 
out downward and, presumably, that is the direction of best performance. But 
that’s not what we see. 


Statistics 1155 


Table 74.3 

Cumulative Failure Rates 
Maximum Price Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Rise or Decline (%) Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
5 (breakeven) 113 or 19% 456 or 51% 64 or 28% 
10 76 or 32% 165 or 70% 44 or 47% 
15 55 or 42% 80 or 79% 30 or 60% 
20 41 or 49% 59 or 86% 18 or 68% 
25 32 or 54% 39 or 90% 12 or 73% 
30 32 or 60% 28 or 93% 14 or 79% 
35 23 or 64% 30 or 97% 14 or 85% 
50 64 or 75% 26 or 99% 24 or 95% 
75 59 or 85% 5 or 100% 9 or 99% 
Over 75 87 or 100% 0 or 100% 2 or 100% 


Let’s go through the numbers for the bull market, upward breakout col- 
umn. I found that 19% of wedges fail to see price rise more than 5%. Thirty- 
two percent failed to see price rise more than 10%. 

Look at the downward breakout numbers in bull markets. The failure 
rate starts at 51% and climbs to 70% the next row down. Over half of wedges 
won’t see price drop more than 5%. 

How do you use the table? Say your cost of trading is 5% and you want 
to make 10% on average, for a total of 15%. Which breakout direction and 
market condition will work best for wedges? Answer: wedges with upward 
breakouts in bull markets. They fail 42% of the time to rise more than 15%, 
but that is the best of the lot. 

Table 74.4 shows breakout-related statistics. 

Breakout direction. Wedges like to break out downward most often, 
regardless of market conditions (bull or bear). 

Yearly position, performance. The best performers occur in the low- 
est third of the yearly price range in all three columns. You'll want to avoid 
downward breakouts at high altitude, those with breakouts within a third of 
the yearly high. The air is so thin up there that parachutes don’t work. I think 
they found that out by trying it. Rest in peace. 

Apex distance. The breakout occurs 67% of the way to the wedge’s apex. 
I was surprised at how consistent it was across all columns, so I checked my 
spreadsheet. The numbers are correct for the data I analyzed. The median is 
based on calendar days, not trading days in case you’re wondering. 

Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks happen a tad more 
often than we see in other chart pattern types (which is 66%). After price breaks 
out, it takes 11 or 12 days, on average, for the stock to return to the breakout price. 


1156 Wedges, Rising 


Table 74.4 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


Bull Market, 
Down Breakout 


Bear Market, 
Down Breakout 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts 
occurring near the 
12-month low (L), 
middle (M), or high (H) 

Median breakout 
distance to apex 


Throwbacks/pullbacks 
occurrence 


Average time to throwback/ 
pullback peaks 

Average time to throwback/ 
pullback ends 


Average rise/decline for 
patterns with throw- 
backs/pullbacks 


Average rise/decline for 
patterns without 
throwbacks/pullbacks 


Percentage price 
resumes trend 


Performance with 
breakout day gap 


Performance without 
breakout day gap 


Average gap size 


40% up 


L 51%, M 33%, 
H 38% 


67% 


72% 
3% in 5 days 


12 days 


35% 


46% 


75% 


40% 


38% 
$0.38 


60% down 


L-11%, M-9%, 
H -8% 


67% 


72% 
-4% in 5 days 


11 days 


-8% 


-13% 


35% 


-9% 


-9% 
$0.45 


66% down 


L -19%, M-18%, 
H -14% 


67% 


70% 
—5% in 6 days 


11 days 


-14% 


-23% 


51% 


-17% 


-17% 
$0.29 


In all columns, wedges showing throwbacks or pullbacks suffered worse 
performance, and the performance difference is wide, too. For example, in bear 
markets, wedges with pullbacks saw price decline 14%. Without pullbacks, the 


decline measured 23%. 


Gaps. Gaps on the day of the breakout helped performance but only in 
bull markets after upward breakouts. The performance difference wasn’t big, 
either. Because of the way I measured performance with gaps (buying at the 
open the day after a gap), you can find a rising wedge with a gap, buy later, and 
still participate in the marginally better performance. 


Statistics 1157 


Table 74.5 shows pattern size statistics. 

Height. Most of the time, tall wedges perform better than short ones. 
The lone exception is for wedges with upward breakouts in bull markets. 
Under those circumstances, height doesn’t matter. 

To determine if your wedge is tall or short, measure the height from 
highest peak to lowest valley (in the wedge) and divide it by the breakout price. 
If the result is greater than the median shown in the table, then you have a 
tall wedge. 

Width. Wide wedges perform better than narrow ones in all cases except 
those in bull markets with downward breakouts that show no performance 
difference. For reference, I used the median length as the separator between 
narrow and wide, so refer to the values in the table. 

Height and width combinations. Tall and wide patterns outperform 
in two of three columns. I wouldn’t put a lot of confidence in the 50% rise 
for short and wide patterns in bull markets after upward breakouts. It might 
be accurate, but other types of chart patterns favor tall and wide as the best 
performing. 


Table 74.5 
Size Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Tall pattern 38% -10% -18% 
performance 
Short pattern 38% -8% -15% 
performance 
Median height as 11.9% 13.7% 20.1% 
a percentage of 
breakout price 
Narrow pattern 33% -9% -16% 
performance 
Wide pattern 43% -9% -17% 
performance 
Median width 42 days 42 days 40 days 
Short and narrow 32% -8% -15% 
performance 
Short and wide 50% -7% -16% 
performance 
Tall and wide 40% -11% -19% 
performance 
Tall and narrow 34% -9% -18% 


performance 


1158 Wedges, Rising 


Table 74.6 
Volume Statistics 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Volume trend 79% down 79% down 74% down 
Rising volume trend 41% -9% -16% 
performance 
Falling volume trend 37% -9% -17% 
performance 
Heavy breakout volume 40% -10% -18% 
performance 
Light breakout volume 34% -9% -16% 
performance 


Table 74.6 shows volume-related statistics. 

Volume trend. I used linear regression to show that most wedges have a 
falling volume trend. 

Rising/Falling volume. The biggest performance difference is for 
wedges with rising volume in bull markets after upward breakouts. The other 
two columns don’t see a statistically significant performance difference. 

Breakout day volume. Again, upward breakouts in bull markets see 
a big performance difference. They favor heavy breakout volume as do the 
other columns. 

Iremoved Table 74.7 because the way I calculate how often stops trigger 
doesn’t apply to wedges. 

Table 74.8 shows the performance over three decades, but it only 
includes bull market statistics. The bear markets only happened in the 2000s, 
so I excluded them. 

Performance over time. For upward breakouts, the 2000s showed the 
best performance and the 1990s showed the worst. Downward breakouts show 
performance deteriorating since the 1990s. 


Table 74.8 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout 
1990s 31% -13% 
2000s 41% -8% 
2010s 39% -7% 

Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 20% 33% 
2000s 17% 55% 


2010s 21% 61% 


Statistics 1159 


Failures over time. Want a cheap thrill? Look at how the failure rates 
climb after downward breakouts. The rise from 33% in the 1990s nearly dou- 
bled in the 2010s, to 61%. Both the 1990s and 2010s had only bull markets, so 
the two periods are comparable. 

I looked at the Dow industrials over those two decades. The 1990s show 
the Dow rise by four times its opening price. The 2010s saw price rise by 2.6 
times. So the 1990s had better bullish performance. I would think that a down- 
ward breakout in the 1990s, when price was rising strongly, would cause more 
failures than the 2010s when price didn’t climb as much. 

Upward breakouts saw failures hold reasonably steady over the 
last 30 years. 

Table 74.9 shows busted pattern performance. For the wedge to bust, 
price breaks out in one direction, moves no more than 10%, and then reverses. 
It has to travel to the other end of the wedge and close beyond it to bust. 

For example, a busted downward breakout happens when price breaks 
out downward, drops less than 10%, and then rises to close above the top of 
the wedge. 

Busted patterns count. Because wedges can be tall, I would expect a low 
bust rate, and that’s true but only after an upward breakout. Downward break- 
outs seem to bust double to triple the rate of upward breakouts. 

Busted occurrence. I sorted busted patterns by how many times they 
busted. Single busted patterns placed first, but check the table for which ones 
come in second. 

I like to see lots of single busts. They perform well, and if they hap- 
pen most often, then it makes trading a busted pattern more reliable with 
less stress. 


Table 74.9 
Busted Patterns 
Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Busted patterns 125 or 21% 558 or 63% 96 or 42% 

count 
Single bust count 67 or 54% 424 or 76% 58 or 60% 
Double bust count 32 or 26% 14 or 3% 3 or 3% 
Triple+ bust count 26 or 21% 120 or 22% 35 or 36% 
Performance for all -14% 43% 22% 

busted patterns 
Single busted -23% 56% 27% 

performance 
Non-busted -9% 38% 21% 


performance 


1160 Wedges, Rising 


Busted and non-busted performance. The last three rows in the 
table compare busted performance with non-busted wedges. Notice that 
single busted patterns outperform the other two rows, and by handsome 
amounts, too. 

Consider trading a busted wedge after downward breakouts in bull 
markets. The rise averages 56%. Maybe you can bite off a bit of that for your 
wallet or purse. 


Trading Tactics 


Table 74.10 shows trading tactics. 

Measure rule, targets. The measure rule for rising wedges is opposite 
that for falling wedges. The measure rule says that price should decline (down- 
ward breakouts) to the lowest valley in the wedge. For upward breakouts, I use 
the height of the wedge added to the breakout price. 

The bottom portion of the table shows how often these two methods 
work. Incidentally, if you use half the height to get a prediction for an upward 
breakout target, it works 77% of the time. 

Once you know where the price target is, change the distance into a per- 
centage of the current price and check Table 74.3 to see how often price fails 
to move beyond the target. 


Table 74.10 
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic Explanation 
Measure rule For downward breakouts, the target is the bottom of the wedge. For 


upward breakouts, subtract the lowest low from the highest 
high and add it to the breakout price. The result is the target 
price. The bottom portion of the table shows how often this 
works. 


Wait for breakout Wait for the breakout (price should close outside the trendline) to 
improve the chances of a successful trade. 

Take profit quickly Since failures are high and the average rise or decline isn’t great, 
be ready to close out the trade quickly. 


Busted trade See Table 74.9 for guidance. Only trade busted downward break- 
outs in bull markets. 


Bull Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Percentage reaching 63% 32% 42% 


full height target 


Trading Tactics 1161 


For example, if the distance is $5 to the target from the current break- 
out price of $50, that’s a 10% move. Table 74.3 says that in bull markets after 
upward breakouts, 32% of patterns will fail to see price rise more than 10%. 
So that gives you an idea of how often the trade will fail (and how many 
will succeed). 

Figure 74.4 shows one application of the measure rule. The well-defined 
rising wedge (the June pattern) passes all the identification guidelines outlined 
in Table 74.1. A trader willing to short the stock would use the measure rule 
to gauge the likely profitability of the trade. In this example, the target price 
is the lowest price in the wedge, or 29.75. Price drops to the target just over a 
week after the breakout. 

Wait for breakout. ‘To improve the chances of trading success, wait for 
a breakout. Don’t try to guess the breakout direction ahead of time. Mistakes 
can be costly. 

Take profit quickly. With performance from the rising wedge so bad 
and failures even worse, you might want to reconsider trying to short this bad 
boy. If you have a death wish, then trade them carefully and watch for a rever- 
sal. Close out a trade quickly unless you find valid technical or fundamental 
evidence supporting your beliefs. Keep in mind that the market is always right. 
It will tell your wallet or purse when you’ve made a mistake. 

Busted trade. I discussed how single busted wedges outperformed their 
non-busted siblings. I would stick to targeting downward breakouts in bull 
markets that bust. The single bust rate is high (76%), and single busted patterns 


Fruit of the Loom (Apparel, NYSE, FTL) 


Symmetrical Triangle —42 


my he 
uth 


Mpls hf 1 - 31 


———_—— * Il 
Target y Hl | -29 


Apr 93 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 


Figure 74.4 A downward breakout from the symmetrical triangle suggests price 
will fall. The measure rule for rising wedges with downward breakouts is simply the 
lowest price in the wedge, shown here at 29.75. 


1162 Wedges, Rising 


outperform (gaining an average of 56%). That gain measures from the top of 
the wedge to the ultimate high. 


Sample Trade 


Joe is a midlevel manager at a large corporation. One of the qualities in which 
he is gifted is patience. He handles stress easily and does not let small problems 
bother him. In his spare time, he likes to trade stocks and has developed a keen 
sense to make short sales work for him. 

After returning from vacation, Joe discovered the situation shown in 
Figure 74.5. He missed the initial downward breakout but still wanted to 
short the stock. 

Viewing the chart from a longer-term perspective, Joe believed that the 
wedge was an upward retrace in a long-term downtrend (not shown in the fig- 
ure). He believed the stock would withdraw back to its launch price of about 
30. He would consider closing out the trade at that point and not before unless 
price rose against him. So, he set a stop-loss order at the top of the wedge at 
36.75, about 25 cents above the pattern’s high. 

If the stock price continued in his favor (down), then it would be com- 
pleting a measured move down. Joe estimated that the measured move would 
take the stock to 28 and perhaps lower. 

When the stock pulled back to the bottom trendline and headed down 
the next day, “I sold the stock short at 36.” 


Tootsie Roll Industries Inc (Food Processing, NYSE, TR) 


i hh 
| WA, ; \ "lh | Hd ; 
Wi len, My yo 


Pullback 


Stock Shorted 


i | Breakout 
- 32 


e 
-29 


-28 
Aug 93 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 94 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 74.5 This rising wedge predicts price will fall to 33.75, and it does, in 
just 2 days. 


Sample Trade 1163 


He reviewed the measure rule that said the stock would fall to the bottom 
of the wedge for a decline of about 6% from the purchase price. 

Joe watched the stock closely and was gratified to see price soon drop 
below the measure rule target of 33.75. Then the stock rebounded. As the 
stock climbed at the start of December, Joe reevaluated his short position. 
From what he was able to gather, the fundamental and technical situation had 
not changed, so he decided to sit tight. 

Even as the stock climbed above 35 in January, Joe believed he was right. 
The tenacious attitude served him well on this trade, and the stock soon 
began heading down again. In May, the stock reached his target price of 30. 
“T considered covering the short, but didn’t.” 

The stock moved sideways for about 4 months and then dropped again. 
It reached a low of 25.43 in mid-December and headed back up. Joe covered 
his short position at 27, just a week after it made a new low. On the trade, Joe 
made almost $9,000, or about 25%, on his 1,000 shares in about a year. 

Did Joe trade this stock properly? Originally, he wanted to wait for the 
stock to reach his launch price, about 30, but then lowered his target. In other 
words, he veered away from his trading plan. Doing that can create bad habits 
which might lead to a big loss. 

If his trading plan allowed him to reconsider additional evidence for a 
continued hold, then he was fine deviating. However, he could have entered 
additional trades during the 4 months when the stock moved sideways. Instead 
he held on in the hope that price would continue lower. That’s risky for a 
short position. 


7S 


Wolfe Wave®, Bearish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 
Appearance: A rising wedge, bounded by two up-sloping and converging trendlines. 


Downward Breakouts 


Bull Market Bear Market 

Reversal or continuation Short-term bearish Short-term bearish 
reversal reversal 

Performance rank 35 out of 36 18 out of 19 
Breakeven failure rate 30% 13% 
Average decline 12% 19% 
Percentage meeting price target 37% 41% 
See also Rising wedge 


The bearish Wolfe wave is part chart pattern and part trading methodology. 
It’s a rising wedge with a signal line to provide trading guidance. We’ll see 
examples of the pattern in a moment. 

I used information provided by Bill Wolfe from his article, “Seeing the 
Future” (http://www.wolfewave.com), and built my own model based only on 
that article. It may or may not resemble actual Wolfe waves, and it certainly 
doesn’t include the proprietary information he provides in his course. 

I tested the chart pattern using the usual method of gauging the drop to 
the ultimate low. However, that’s not how the pattern is traded. [’ll test some of 
his ideas later in Trading Tactics. Using my traditional gauges, the breakeven 
failure rate is high in bull markets, 30%, but less than half that in bear markets. 


1164 


Tour 1165 


The average decline is unimpressive at 12% (bull market) and 19% (bear 
market), which is why the performance rank is almost last in both markets 
(where a rank of 1 is best). The ability of the pattern to reach its target falls well 
short of what we see for other chart pattern types. 

However, for swing traders, this chart pattern may interest you. Let’s look 
at some examples. 


Tour 


Figure 75.1 shows an example of a bearish Wolfe wave. Price began a long 
uptrend starting from lows in September and October. When the Wolfe wave 
formed at the start of the New Year, you might think that the stock would want 
to take a rest after such a steep climb (a near double). I find that determining 
when an uptrend will end is always hard because they last longer than I expect. 
Wolfe-wavers might say it’s not difficult to spot a trend end because of the 
appearance of the Wolfe wave at turns 1 through 5. 

Price peaked at turn 1 and sent price lower to 2. Then the stock recov- 
ered to make a new high at 3, followed by a higher low at 4. All of that suggests 
an uptrend continuing: higher highs and higher lows, but at a diminished 
pace. 

Even when point 5 appeared, everything looked good for a resumption 
of the uptrend. The high at 5 was above peak 3. In fact, a line drawn across the 
peaks formed a trendline with three touches. Connecting another trendline 
joining valleys 2 and 4 forms what I call a rising wedge. It’s also a Wolfe wave. 


Incyte Corp (INCY) 


hy ‘a sm 


06 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 07 Feb Mar Apr May Jun 


Figure 75.1 This Wolfe wave sees price drop but did not reach its target when it 
was expected. 


1166 Wolfe Wave®, Bearish 


Volume at turn 5 was not impressive. It was well below the prior three 
volume spikes that month. Wolfe writes that volume on turn 5 should be heavy, 
as if the bulls and bears are battling it out for control of the world. In this case, 
though, volume was higher at 5 than the day before but not the kind of spike 
you'd wish to see at turn 5. Nevertheless, the stock tumbled. 

We’ve seen in triangle patterns that when the apex forms (like that shown 
at point A), it’s often a turning point for the stock. The stock will reverse (form 
a minor high or low) almost directly above or below the apex (depending on 
the breakout direction). The stock may not change trend, and it often doesn’t, 
but it does make a very short-term reversal. 

In this case, the stock ignored the apex turn theory. I circled B on the line 
connecting points | and 4. Line 1-4 is called the EPA line (Estimate Price at 
Arrival). It’s supposed to predict (with the apex) both the price and time of the 
decline. In other words, directly below the apex and matching line 1-4 (at B), 
the stock should have dropped that far. If it had, it would signal an exit. 

From my experience looking at the pattern and reading Wolfe’s descrip- 
tion, the time element (the so-called “ETA” line, for Estimated Time of Arrival, 
which is different from the EPA line mentioned above) is deemphasized. How- 
ever, it’s an interesting notion. The ETA line does provide timing information, 
and I’d rather have such an educated guess than not have it. To use it, just drop 
a vertical line at the apex down until it reaches a line drawn connecting turns | 
and 4. [’ll discuss this more later. 

In this example, price touches line 1-4 (EPA) at C, signaling an end to 
the trade. 

If you look at this chart, notice that the Wolfe wave appears right at the 
end of the uptrend. And it tells you to cover your short at C, almost near the 
bottom of the decline before the stock recovers. That’s terrific timing. 

How do we find the various turning points? 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 75.1 shows the identification guidelines. Consult Figure 75.2 for 
additional guidance as we go through the list of rules. 

Points 1, 2. Wolfe suggests finding a Wolfe wave by locating point 2 first. 
It’s any minor low or valley on the chart. Point 1 is the top of the prior hill. 
I emphasize the word, top. 

In Wolfe’s charts, he shows two examples where turn | is zot at the top of 
the prior hill (in other words, line 1-3 cuts through price instead of resting on 
the top of the hill formed at turn 1). In my model, I did not accept this behav- 
ior. I always used peaks for point 1. 

Point 3. From the valley at turn 2, price rises and peaks at point 3. Turn 
3 must be higher than turn 1. 


Identification Guidelines 1167 


Table 75.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Point 1 Wolfe describes point 1 this way: “The 1 point is the top prior to point 2 
(bottom), that 3 has surpassed.” Look for the top of the hill leading to 
point 2, providing the top of point 1 is below the price of top 3. 


Point 2 This is any minor low on the chart, providing it follows point 1. 

Point 3 This is the top of the hill begun by point 2. Point 3 must be higher 
than point 1. 

Point 4 This is the bottom of the hill begun by point 3. Point 4 must be above 
the price of 2, otherwise lines 2-4 and 1-3 will not converge. 

Point 5 This is the top of the hill begun by point 4. It need not turn on line 1-3. 

Apex, ETA Lines 1-3 and 2-4, extended into the future, must converge. If they do 


not, then you do not have a Wolfe wave. Where they join is called the 
ETA, or Estimate Time of Arrival. It’s the date of the wedge’s apex. 


Other rules There should not be another higher peak or lower valley between the 
various turning points 1 through 5. 


EPA Estimated Price at Arrival. Draw a line connecting turns 1 and 4. When 
price meets the line, exit the trade. 


On Assignment, Inc (ASGN) 


18 Dec Jan 07 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 75.2 Price met the target in this example on time. 


Point 4. This is another valley or minor low that follows peak 3. The val- 
ley must be above the price of turn 2 so that lines joining turns 1 and 3 with 
another line connecting 2 and 4 converge. It should look like a rising wedge, 
because that’s what it is. 

Point 5. Turn 5 must be above peak 3. It forms from and after the valley 
of turn 4. Here’s the tricky part. In my model, I like to see turn 5 line up with 


1168 Wolfe Wave®, Bearish 


peaks 1 and 3 but provide a minor amount of wiggle room (see the chart, where 
point 5 is marginally above the top trendline). 

According to Wolfe, you can draw a line starting at the top of point 3, par- 
allel to line 2-4. If price stays within the area defined by this new line and line 
1-3 (extended into the future), then point 5 is fine. It’s what Wolfe calls the sweet 
spot. They key to point 5 is you’re expecting the stock to drop after it appears. 

Volume should increase on the day point 5 peaks and drop thereafter (for 
a few days, anyway). Otherwise, he says to be suspicious of the pattern. If vol- 
ume is low, he suggests looking at a shorter time scale for a fractal Wolfe wave 
(a shorter Wolfe wave buried within the longer one). 

In Figure 75.2, the stock does show increased volume at turn 5, and it’s 
heavier than the prior week. But the following day, as price drops, volume 
increases even more 

Apex, ETA. The apex of the wedge, where lines connecting peaks 1, 3, 
and 5 meet another line joining valleys 2 and 4, is what Wolfe calls the ETA 
or Estimated Time of Arrival. He writes, “I also do not count on the ETA as 
this adds just too many variables to the equation.” P’II tell how often the ETA 
works later in this chapter. 

Other rules. I added additional rules so that there should not be peaks or 
valleys between the turns poking above or below lines 1-3-5 and 2-4. In other 
words, if I found a peak between turns 1 and 3 that was higher than 3, I would 
throw away the pattern. 

EPA. The Estimate Price at Arrival, when used with the ETA, provides 
useful timing when it works. The EPA is the signal line. When price touches 
the line, it’s a signal to close out the trade. 

Look at Figure 75.2. The ETA is the date of the triangle’s apex (which 
forms a day or two after point 5 in this example). The EPA is line 1-4, and it 
touches the stock right when it was predicted to (by the ETA). If you shorted 
the stock at peak 5 (or a day later) and covered the short at the EPA, you could 
have made money on the swing trade. In this example, however, the stock con- 
tinued to drop all the way down to 50.33, well below the EPA of 64 and change. 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 75.3 shows an example of what the failure of a Wolfe wave looks like. 
Points 1 through 4 mark the four turns of the Wolfe wave. Point 5 peaks above line 
1-3, but that’s fine. It’s within the sweet spot created by drawing a line parallel to 
line 24 starting at peak 3. I don’t show that line, but it’s easy enough to imagine. 

Volume surrounding peak 5 is ideal. It peaks at turn 5 and is higher than 
any volume spike going back to February. Going forward, it’s also higher than 
any spike going into June. Everything about this Wolfe wave suggests the stock 
will drop. 


Focus on Failures 1169 


Interactive Brokers Group Inc (IBKR) 


i ™ a iv " \ My \N 3 


t i a 


EPA\ ; _ 48 
ETA ; 
\ 


t 


18 Dec Jan 19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure 75.3 Price failed to perform as expected in this Wolfe wave. 


I drew the ETA from the apex down until it met the EPA line (joining 
points 1-4). If the Wolfe wave worked as expected (or hoped), this would be 
the day the stock dropped to about 48. As you can see, price hasn’t touched the 
EPA line (going into November 2019, not shown). 

So what went wrong? This could be one example, carefully chosen, 
where the pattern didn’t work. The reasons for it not working are unknown. 
However, the two prior charts do provide evidence. It’s clearest on the first 
chart, Figure 75.1. Notice how the pattern appears in a distinct and obvious 
uptrend. Even Figure 75.2 shows an uptrend, starting from the low in Decem- 
ber 2018. The stock wobbled at the top, formed a Wolfe wave, and down the 
stock went. 

In Figure 75.3, there is no uptrend. In fact, if you look at the longer-term 
chart, you'll see price is actually declining. You might think a declining price 
trend would help the pattern perform. Why? Because it’s bearish and we expect 
price to drop. And yet, in this example, price drops for a bit after turn 5 but then 
makes a new high in May. 

A check of the statistics suggests that when a Wolfe wave appears in a 
downtrend, price shows a larger decline, 12% (price trending down) to 10% 
(price trending up). I measured this using the price of the trend start (see the 
Glossary for a definition) compared to point 1. 

I will say that Figure 75.3 is very choppy-looking, as if the stock is having 
a tough time finding a trend. Compare that to Figure 75.1, where the stock 
chart looks smoother, less choppy. 

Let’s discuss performance statistics for the Wolfe wave. 


1170 Wolfe Wave®, Bearish 


Statistics 


Table 75.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. Wolfe waves are plentiful. I found 7,077 in 1,221 stocks 
from January 1990 to June 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire span, and 
some no longer trade. 

Average decline. If you want to make money with this pattern, it’ll be 
easier in a bear market, according to the statistics. In an apples-to-apples com- 
parison with other types of chart patterns (from the peak at point 5 to the 
ultimate low), the drop falls well short of what other chart patterns average in 
both bull and bear markets. 

Measured from the peak at point 5 to the EPA line (for those stocks 
which declined that far), the average decline is 9% in bull markets, but 14% in 
bear markets. 

Breakeven failure rate. This is a measure of how many Wolfe waves fail 
to see price drop more than 5% from the high at point 5 (on the way down 
to the ultimate low, or to the EPA line). The two measures are different. The 
ultimate low uses a close above the top of point 5 or a rise of 20% off a low (see 
the Glossary, “Ultimate low,” for a better, more thorough explanation), but the 
failure rate for the EPA line uses the high price at point 5 to the low price that 
touches or drops below the EPA line. 

The average failure rate in bull markets (and downward breakouts) for all 
chart pattern types is 24.7%, and in bear markets it’s 10.6%. So the Wolfe wave 
is better (lower failure rates) than both of those measures. 

Time to reach. The EPA line is the one connecting turns 1 and 4. The 
drop is fast, about 2 weeks, to reach the line on average. So you can make a 
decent chunk of change quickly with this pattern. Because the ultimate low is 
further away, it takes almost twice as long to reach it. 


Table 75.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 5,937 1,140 
Average decline to ultimate low -12% -19% 
Average decline to EPA -9% -14% 
Breakeven failure rate to ultimate low 30% 13% 
Breakeven failure rate to EPA line 23% 7% 
Time to reach ultimate low 30 days 29 days 
Time to reach EPA line 15 days 16 days 


How many change trend? 18% 38% 


Statistics 1171 


How many change trend? As a measure of how many patterns see price 
drop more than 20% below the peak at turn 5, the results leave something to 
be desired. The numbers are well below what we’ve seen for other types of 
chart patterns (the averages: 28% for bull markets and 49% for bear markets). 

Keep in mind that I didn’t add any special sauce to the Wolfe model to 
improve performance. If you follow Wolfe’s guidance, then maybe you can get 
the pattern to perform better. 

Table 75.3 shows volume statistics as they relate to performance. 

Performance, volume above/below average. I measured volume at 
point 5 (1 day) and compared it to the average volume of the prior month 
(not including point 5). Performance measures from the peak at point 5 to the 
ultimate low, not the EPA line. 

I found that when point 5 had above-average volume, the stock declined 
marginally more, but the failure rate (the number in parenthesis) dropped 
markedly for both bull and bear markets. 

Volume twice average. For those stocks where volume at peak 5 was at 
least twice the monthly average, the failure rate dropped even more (to 20%, 
bull market), but overall performance stayed about the same. In bear markets, 
both the performance (21%) and failure rate (9%) improved. 

In short, do look for higher volume at peak 5. 

In Table 75.4 I show performance over time for the Wolfe wave as meas- 
ured from the peak at point 5 to the ultimate low. 


Table 75.3 
Volume Statistics (Failure Rate) 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance when point 5 volume is above average -12% (28%) -19% (11%) 
Performance when point 5 volume is below average -11% (33%) -20% (17%) 
Volume twice average at point 5 -12% (20%) -21% (9%) 

Table 75.4 

Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s -13% 
2000s -12% 
2010s -11% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 

1990s 27% 
2000s 28% 


2010s 35% 


1172 Wolfe Wave®, Bearish 


As you scan down the table, notice that performance decreases while 
failure rates increase. The failure rate has jumped from 28% to 35% from the 
2000s to 2010s. I don’t know the reason for this, but it might be that the popu- 
larity of the pattern has more people trading it, leading to poorer performance 
(which can happen if people anticipate a move and act sooner than normal). 


Trading Tactics 


In Table 75.5 I don’t show the usual trading tactics. I suggest you visit Bill 
Wolfe’s website or find a copy of his article, “Seeing the Future,” if you wish to 
know how to better trade the Wolfe wave. 

Table 75.5 shows how often price drops to various points. 

Hit ETA and EPA. I conducted a visual survey using 100 stocks. I found 
that 36% of the time, for those stocks that reached the EPA line, they reached 
the line within a 5-day window (2 days before the ETA to 2 days after). The 
result gives you an idea of how many trades will actually reach the price target 
on time. I only counted those in bull markets, not bear markets. 

Hit EPA, stopped out, ultimate low. I measured (using a computer) 
what price did on the way to the ultimate low, which is the lowest low before 
price closed more than 20% above the low (after point 5). 

If price closed above the top of point 5, then I considered the trade stopped 
out. In bull markets, just over half the trades were stopped out in this manner. 

If price reached the EPA target, then that completed the trade. Just over 
a third reached the target. The remainder reached the ultimate low, the lowest 
low before a rebound. 

Points 1 through 4. On the way to finding the ultimate low, I computed 
how often price dropped to the price of the associated turns. For example, 
I found that price on the way down from 5 reached the next nearest point (3) 
86% of the time in bull markets and 92% of the time in bear markets. 

In other words, you can use these percentages to help gauge how far price 
might drop. 


Table 75.5 
Trading Tactics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Hit ETA & EPA 36% Not measured 
Hit EPA 37% 41% 

Stopped out 56% 44% 

Ultimate low 7% 14% 

Point 1 68% 76% 

Point 2 27% 37% 

Point 3 86% 92% 


Point 4 51% 57% 


Sample Trade 1173 


Sample Trade 


Figure 75.4 shows how Miles made money trading the Wolfe wave. 

I show the Wolfe wave as turns | through 5. At turn 5, Miles studied the 
pattern. “I liked how price climbed from the June low.” He also liked how 
volume was higher at C (on the volume scale) than most of the days of the 
preceding month. 

He drew the EPA line by connecting turns 1 and 4. Because lines 1-3-5 
and 2-4 were almost parallel, he ignored the ETA because the apex would be 
too far away. 

The next day, before the market opened, he saw that the bid—asked range 
was likely to show the stock opening lower. “I decided to short the stock 
at 30.29.” 

Immediately, he placed a stop-loss order at 31.13, three cents above 
the peak at turn 5. The target was the EPA line, which varied from day to 
day because of its slope. He decided to monitor it and sell when the stock 
touched the line. 

“I watched the stock go nowhere for over a week and for me, that’s a 
red flag. I’ve seen lots of shorts go bad when that happens.” He hoped the 
gap at A would provide enough overhead resistance to thwart any meaningful 
advance. 

He was right. The stock eventually started down. When the stock reached 
B, the EPA line, he closed out the short at the end of the day and received a 
fill at 29.19. 

On the swing trade, he made $1.10 a share or 3.5% in 18 calendar days. 


PPL Corporation (PPL) 


WA iit 
ben ha de’ Th mf i 
Hil J May Ka ih 2 - 28 
¥) -27 
i - 26 
it 
-25 
- 24 
¢€ 
23 
18 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan 19 Feb 


Figure 75.4 Miles makes money from this swing trade. 


76 


Wolfe Wave®, Bullish 


RESULTS SNAPSHOT 


Appearance: A falling wedge bounded by two down-sloping and converging trendlines. 


Upward Breakouts 
Bull Market Bear Market 
Reversal or continuation Long-term bull- Short-term bullish 
ish reversal continuation 
Performance rank 34 out of 39 4 out of 20 
Breakeven failure rate 15% 5% 
Average rise 35% 32% 
Percentage meeting 47% 38% 
price target 
See also Falling wedge 


The layout of this chapter is different from many others in this book. To find 
the pattern, I used information provided by Bill Wolfe from his article, “Seeing 
the Future” (http://www.wolfewave.com), and built my own model based only 
on that article. It may or may not resemble actual Wolfe waves, and it certainly 
doesn’t include the proprietary information he provides in his course. 

In its simplest form, a bullish Wolfe wave is a falling wedge with a signal 
line. Wolfe calls the signal line the EPA (Estimated Price at Arrival). I'll discuss 
that later. 

The above Results Snapshot provides a glimpse into the pattern’s behav- 
ior using my traditional gauges, that of the rise to the ultimate high. How- 
ever, that’s not how the pattern is supposed to be measured for performance. 


1174 


Tour 1175 


I'll measure and discuss some of Wolfe’s targets in Trading ‘Tactics. If you’re a 
swing trader, pay close attention to that section. 

The average rise in bull markets is below what you’d expect from bullish 
chart patterns. The rank reflects this dismal performance, putting it near the 
bottom of the list of chart patterns, where a rank of 1 is best. 

In bear markets, however, the average rise at 32% is near the top of the 
list for best performance, ranking fourth where a rank of 1 is best. 

The failure rate in bull markets is average, but the bear market failure rate 
is unusually small. Often the better the average rise the smaller the failure rate. 

Let’s look at a few examples before we delve into the performance 
statistics. 


Tour 


Figure 76.1 shows the five turns that compose the bullish Wolfe wave, num- 
bered 1 through 5. A trendline connecting valleys 1 and 3 slopes downward 
but so does another trendline connecting peaks 2 and 4. The top trendline has 
a steeper slope so that the two lines converge sometime in the future. Where 
they meet is the apex of the falling wedge, which Wolfe calls the ETA (Esti- 
mated ‘Time of Arrival). It’s the date when the stock is supposed to meet the 
price target for the Wolfe wave. 

An EPA line joins turns 1 and 4 like that shown in the figure. Extend that 
line into the future, and if you’re lucky, price will match the EPA at the ETA, 
signaling a sale. Did I use too many acronyms? 


Alcoa (AA) 


18 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr 


Figure 76.1 This bullish Wolfe wave meets its price target quickly. 


1176 Wolfe Wave®, Bullish 


In this example, however, price reaches the EPA at B well short of the 
wedge’s apex (ETA). 

Volume at turn 5 is heavy at A (volume scale). On either side of A, vol- 
ume diminishes, which is what you want to see according to Wolfe. In short, a 
Wolfe wave is a falling wedge with five turns but adds the EPA line (1-4). 

In this example, price breaks out upward at B and then dies. The pattern 
busts the upward breakout when price collapses and heads well below the bot- 
tom of the wedge. In the traditional sense, this example is bullish because of 
the upward breakout, but not so you’d stand up and cheer. 

Let’s discuss the guidelines for finding bullish Wolfe waves. 


Identification Guidelines 


Table 76.1 lists identification guidelines. Consult Figure 76.2 for additional 
guidance as we go through the rules. I programmed my computer using the 
guidelines listed in Table 76.1 to find these patterns automatically. 

Points 1, 2. Wolfe says to find point 2 first. It’s any minor high on the 
chart. From there, look back and find the prior valley where price bottoms. 
That’s point 1. However, in his documentation, he calls point 1 a “bottom,” and 
yet his charts show three examples of bullish Wolfe waves where the security 


Table 76.1 
Identification Guidelines 


Characteristic Discussion 


Point 1 Wolfe describes point 1 this way: “The 1 point is the bottom prior to 
point 2 (top), that 3 has surpassed.” Look for the bottom of the hill 
leading to point 2, providing the bottom of point 1 is above the price 


of valley 3. 

Point 2 This is any minor high on the chart, providing it follows point 1. It’s the 
hill joining valley 1. 

Point 3 This is the bottom of the hill begun by point 2. 

Point 4 This is the top of the hill begun by point 3. Point 4 must be below the 
price of 2, otherwise lines 2-4 and 1-3 will not converge. 

Point 5 This is the bottom of the hill begun by point 4. It need not turn 
on line 1-3. 

Apex, ETA Lines 1-3 and 2-4, extended into the future, must converge. If they do 


not, then you do not have a Wolfe wave. Where they join is called the 
ETA, or Estimated Time of Arrival. It’s the date of the wedge’s apex. 


Other rules There should not be another higher peak or lower valley between the 
various turning points 1 through 5. 


EPA Estimated Price at Arrival. Draw a line connecting turns 1 and 4. When 
price meets the line, exit the trade. 


Identification Guidelines 1177 


Exxon Mobil Corp (XOM) 


18 Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar 


Figure 76.2 This Wolfe wave sees price climb and meet its target almost exactly 
on schedule. 


cuts through price (in technical terms, it means point | is not a minor low). 
For Wolfe waves, I did not allow the stock to slice through price and call it a 
valid turn. I always looked for a minor low as point 1. 

Point 3. The third turn is a valley formed after hill 2. 

Point 4. This is the peak begun by valley 3. The price of this peak must 
be below the price of 2 so that we see two down-sloping and converging trend- 
lines. A line connecting turns 1 and 4 is called the EPA. When price reaches 
the EPA line, that’s the exit signal for a trade. 

Point 5 is the valley formed after peak 4. It need not align with trend- 
line 1-3; however, it can’t be located off in the boonies, either. Rather, it must 
reside between line 1-3 and another line drawn from turn 3 and extended 
parallel to line 2-4. The area between lines 1-3 and 3-6 is what Wolfe calls the 
sweet spot. I show it in the inset. 

Apex, ETA. Where the two trendlines (1-3 and 2-4) of the wave join is 
called the ETA or Estimated Time of Arrival. Price is supposed to turn at the 
ETA or at least join with the EPA line. If the two lines don’t converge, then 
you don’t have a Wolfe wave. 

Other rules. I programmed my computer with additional conditions to 
make the pattern look like the figures in this chapter. That means no extrane- 
ous hills or valleys interrupting the converging shape of the pattern. For exam- 
ple, if a peak between turns 2 and 4 were to poke above point 2, then you 
wouldn’t have a Wolfe wave. 

EPA. The EPA line connects turns 1 and 4 and provides the exit signal. 
When price touches the EPA (at C), close out the trade. We'll talk more about 
trading later. 


1178 Wolfe Wave®, Bullish 


Focus on Failures 


Figure 76.3 shows an example of a Wolfe wave that appears at the top of an 
uptrend, one that is perhaps past its prime. A wider view would show the left 
shoulder of a head-and-shoulders top at D, with a head at E, and right shoul- 
der at the Wolfe wave (probably B). Obviously, peaks 2 and 4 throw a monkey 
wrench into the picture, so the head-and-shoulders pattern is not ideal. How- 
ever, you get the feeling that price wants to drop after peaking at E. So when 
price only climbs to B and dies, it may not come as a surprise. 

The Wolfe wave is denoted by turns 1 through 5 in the figure. At turn 
5, price extends below line 1-3, but that’s fine provided it remains in the 
sweet spot (recall, that’s a line drawn starting at turn 3, parallel to line 2-4), 
which it does. 

Volume at turn 5 (A) looks perfect. It’s higher than prior days, and as 
price climbs, volume diminishes, which is what Wolfe expects to happen in 
well-behaved patterns. 

The EPA line (1-4) extended upward (to C) seems to have an unusually 
steep slope, probably too steep. Maybe the slope of the line is something you'll 
want to test and see if it has any significance. My guess is it does. You'll want to 
trade Wolfe waves with a less-steep EPA line. 

In this example, price can’t reach the EPA line. 

If I were to buy the stock around turn 5, I’d probably exit the trade at the 
open the day after price closed below the 2-4 line at B. That would give me a 
small profit for a quick swing trade. 


Ascena Retail Group (ASNA) 


18 Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan19 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure 76.3 Price fails to rise far enough to reach its target. 


Statistics 1179 


Let’s look at some performance statistics to see how the Wolfe wave 
behaves. 


Statistics 


Table 76.2 shows general statistics. 

Number found. I found 6,251 patterns in 1,230 stocks using data stretch- 
ing from January 1990 to June 2019. Not all stocks covered the entire time, 
and some no longer trade. 

Average rise. The average rise measures from the low at point 5 to the 
ultimate high, which is the highest high before price tumbles more than 20% 
or closes below the bottom of the pattern. 

If you traded the Wolfe wave perfectly and did it often enough, you’d 
make 35% in bull markets and slightly less than that in bear markets. 
Of course, you won't trade it perfectly, especially not over 5,000 times, so expect 
variations. 

As the table shows, if you exit at the EPA line, you will fall well short of 
the results from a perfect trade. However, this (average rise to EPA) does pro- 
vide a more realistic performance gauge. It’s odd that bear markets (20%) show 
better performance for bullish patterns than do bull markets (13%). 

Breakeven failure rate. The breakeven failure rate is a measure of how 
often price fails to rise more than 5% after the breakout. 

The bull market results are about what you’d expect for a chart pattern. 
However, the bear market failures are unusually low. As I mentioned, I checked 
the data and couldn’t find an explanation for this except to say, it is what it is. 
The performance rank of fourth (where 1 is best) also suggests good perfor- 
mance in bear markets, hence the low failure, too. 


Table 76.2 

General Statistics 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Number found 5,084 1,167 
Average rise to ultimate high 35% 32% 
Average rise to EPA 13% 20% 
Breakeven failure rate to ultimate high 15% 5% 
Breakeven failure rate to EPA line 13% 2% 
Time to reach ultimate high 120 days 48 days 
Time to reach EPA line 17 days 12 days 


How many change trend? 40% 49% 


1180 Wolfe Wave®, Bullish 


The failure rate as price attempts to reach the EPA line is smaller (which 
is good) than when price rises to the ultimate high. The result measures from 
the low at turn 5 to the EPA line, and it’s another gauge of how many patterns 
fail to rise more than 5%. 

Time to reach. The time to reach the ultimate high is a function of how 
high the average rise is. It’s going to take more time to reach the ultimate high 
(a 35% average rise in bull markets in 120 days) compared to price rising to the 
EPA line (a 13% rise in 17 days). 

A check of the math says that the rise to the EPA line is more than twice 
as fast as the rise to the ultimate high. That’s good news for swing traders. You 
can make more money quickly by trading the EPA line than waiting for the 
stock to reach the ultimate high on average. 

How many change trend? This item is a measure of how many Wolfe 
waves see price rise more than 20% above the low at turn 5. Notice that the 
bear market result is higher than the bull market one, which is unusual. It may 
help explain why there are fewer bear market failures. 

Table 76.3 shows volume statistics as they relate to performance. 

Performance, volume above/below average. Because Wolfe places 
emphasis on turn 5 having volume above the prior days, I tested performance 
when volume was above or below the prior 1-month’s average. In bull markets, 
Wolfe waves (as measured to the ultimate high, not the EPA line) show better 
performance and fewer failures (which appear in parenthesis) when volume is 
above average. 

In bear markets, there is no performance difference, but we do see a 
reduction in failure rates (almost cut in half, from 7% to 4%). 

In short, do check that turn 5 has high volume. 

Volume twice average. For grins, I checked performance when the turn 
at point 5 had at least twice the volume of the 1-month average. In bull mar- 
kets, performance didn’t change but failures decreased (which is good). 

In bear markets, failures stayed the same but performance increased 
dramatically (from 26% to 36%). Again, performance measures from the low 
at point 5 to the ultimate high. So finding point 5 to have heavy volume 
is a plus. 


Table 76.3 
Volume Statistics (Failure Rate) 
Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Performance when point 5 volume is above average 28% (14%) 26% (4%) 
Performance when point 5 volume is below average 26% (17%) 26% (7%) 


Volume twice average at point 5 28% (12%) 36% (4%) 


Trading Tactics 1181 


Table 76.4 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets 
Description Bull Market 
1990s 34% 
2000s 37% 
2010s 33% 
Performance (above), Failures (below) 
1990s 16% 
2000s 13% 
2010s 16% 


Table 76.4 (performance, failures) shows performance and failures of the 
Wolfe wave over the last three decades using my traditional gauges to the 
ultimate high. 

Performance for the pattern was best in the 2000s and that decade also 
had the fewest failures. The worst performance was in the 2010s, but the dif- 
ference between the best performance (37%) and the worst (33%), isn’t large. 
If we were to look at trades using the EPA line as an exit, you might not see 
much of a difference at all. 


Trading Tactics 


In Table 76.5 I don’t show the usual trading tactics. I suggest you visit Bill 
Wolfe’s website or find a copy of his article, “Seeing the Future,” if you wish to 
know how to better trade the bullish Wolfe wave. 

Table 76.5 shows how often price drops to various points. 

Hit ETA and EPA. I conducted an informal test. I visually checked 100 
stocks and counted how often Wolfe waves showed price reaching the EPA 


Table 76.5 
Trading Tactics 

Description Bull Market Bear Market 
Hit ETA & EPA 24% Not measured 
Hit EPA 47% 38% 

Stopped out 45% 43% 

Ultimate high 7% 19% 

Point 1 79% 75% 

Point 2 43% 31% 

Point 3 92% 89% 


Point 4 63% 53% 


1182 Wolfe Wave®, Bullish 


at the ETA. In other words, price at the wedge’s apex should touch line 1-4 
extended into the future, within a 5-day window (2 days before to 2 days after 
the ETA). Figure 76.4 shows an example of this at the junction of the EPA and 
ETA lines. 

I found that about a quarter of the patterns met the target on time. I did 
not test this in bear markets. 

Hit EPA, stopped out, ultimate high. I pretended to trade the pattern 
and analyzed the exit reasons. I found that price hit the EPA line between a 
third (38%) to half (47%) of the time in bear/bull markets, respectively. A simi- 
lar amount were stopped out, meaning price closed below the low at point 5. 
The rest never reached the EPA line but did reach the ultimate high. That is, 
price climbed to a peak and then tumbled by more than 20%. 

Points 1 through 4. I checked how far up price climbed on its way to 
the ultimate high. For example, price will touch point 3 almost all the time, as 
one might expect (because it’s the closest to turn 5). Points farther away, such 
as turn 2, see price reach it less than half the time. 

You can use these percentages as guidance as you contemplate trading a 
rise to the EPA line or even the ultimate high. 


Sample Trade 


Figure 76.4 shows a sample trade Honey made using a Wolfe wave. 
Price peaked in April and took a big dive (from D to E), but she couldn’t 
find any news to account for the drop. After that, the stock rebounded and 


Hologic Inc (HOLX) 
-52 


h " ul 51 
PEE ya bso 
4, hy att hv" | . 
on, ee 404? Yithg Hy 48 
Ah iteug My \3 EPA I PORN: io 
| wh ie li -46 
1 iy sf - ff Ns Y = 
ri I. T { 1 Leh ” 
ih 7 XL 
: t C5 «ETA -43 
~42 
| -4) 
~ 40 
39 
A 38 


37 
19 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct 


Figure 76.4 When the Wolfe wave works, it can be easy to make money quickly, 
as Honey found out. 


Sample Trade 1183 


made its way up to B. At B the company announced second-quarter earnings. 
Some players in the market didn’t appreciate the news (and sent the stock 
down sharply that day), but others liked what they heard. The stock recovered 
to form a doji candlestick, where the opening and closing prices are near or at 
the same value. The bottom of that day formed turn 1. 

Price peaked at turn 2, then wobbled lower, forming turns 3 and 4. At C, 
the company sent out a press release, titled, “FDA clearance of Aptima BV 
and Aptima CV/TV molecular assay ushers in new era of comprehensive and 
objective diagnostic testing for vaginitis.” 

She thought that was good news, but the smart money the day before C 
sent price lower, and even on day C, the stock also closed down. Sometimes 
the anticipation of an event is more exciting than the actual event. To put it 
another way, buy on the rumor and sell on the news. Maybe that’s what hap- 
pened to the stock. 

Volume the day before C was higher than at C, so even though price had 
dropped below the 1-3 line (signaling a potential turn 5, and a buy signal), 
Honey didn’t bite. 

She drew a line connecting turns 1 and 4, forming the EPA line. By 
extending lines 1-3 and 24 until they joined at the wedge’s apex, she had an 
idea of the timing. She could buy in at about 44 and sell at 47, making $3 on 
the trade. 

At turn 5, volume perked up (point A), so “I bought at the open the next 
day, at 44.07.” 

The stock cooperated. It moved up sharply over the next week. When the 
stock touched the EPA line, “I sold and received a fill at 46.90 for a profit of 
$2.83 a share and a hold time of 5 days.” That almost matched the $3 estimate. 


Statistics Summary 


The tables in this chapter show the average performance and failure rates for 
the chart patterns studied in this book. I present an alphabetical list of perfor- 
mance and then sort the results by market conditions and breakout directions. 
I do the same for failure rates. 


Alphabetical List, Performance (higher percentage is better) 


Bear Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Bull Market, Market, Up Down Down 

Description Up Breakout Breakout Breakout Breakout 
AB=CD, bearish* -12.7% -21.6% 
AB=CD, bullish* 38.4% 30.5% 
Bat, bearish* -14.3% —20.2% 
Bat, bullish* 44.3% 34.5% 
Big M -16.6% -22.3% 
Big W 46.1% 29.6% 
Broadening bottom 44.8% -14.6% 
Broadening formation, 42.7% -14.3% 

right-angled and ascending 
Broadening formation, 42.6% -15.3% 

right-angled and 

descending 
Broadening top 41.6% 25.0% -13.4% -21.6% 
Broadening wedge, ascending 41.1% -12.5% 
Broadening wedge, 39.3% -13.2% 

descending 
Bump-and-run reversal, 55.1% 34.7% 

bottom 
Bump-and-run reversal, top -17.2% -24.2% 
Butterfly, bearish* -13.0% -20.2% 
Butterfly, bullish* 39.5% 27.8% 


1184 


Description 


Cloudbank** 

Crab, bearish* 

Crab, bullish* 

Cup with handle 

Cup with handle, inverted 
Diamond bottom 
Diamond top 

Diving board** 


Double bottom, 
Adam & Adam 


Double bottom, Adam & Eve 
Double bottom, Eve & Adam 
Double bottom, Eve & Eve 
Double top, Adam & Adam 
Double top, Adam & Eve 
Double top, Eve & Adam 
Double top, Eve & Eve 

Flag, high tight 

Flag 

Gap 

Gartley, bearish* 

Gartley, bullish* 
Head-and-shoulders bottom 


Head-and-shoulders 
bottom, complex 


Head-and-shoulders top 


Head-and-shoulders 
top, complex 


Horn bottom** 

Horn top** 

Island bottom 

Island top 

Measured move down 
Measured move up 
Pennant 

Pipe bottom** 

Pipe top** 

Rectangle bottom 


Statistics Summary 


Bear 
Bull Market, Market, Up 
Up Breakout Breakout 


39.1% 32.7% 
53.6% 
39.3% 
28.9% 
73.0% 
39.4% 
42.9% 
42.1% 
49.7% 
38.6% 24.6% 
36.3% 29.2% 
45.2% 28.2% 
47.0% 31.6% 
59.0% 34.0% 
31.3% 19.7% 
54.0% 33.0% 
47.6% 


Bull Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


-14.3% 


-17.1% 
-19.1% 
-17.2% 


-15.2% 
-16.0% 
-15.4% 
-15.9% 


-14.1% 


-16.1% 
-16.7% 


-19.0% 


-12.7% 


-19.0% 
-15.7% 


1185 


Bear Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


-22.9% 


-23.0% 


-23.3% 


-23.7% 
-22.6% 


-26.0% 


-22.1% 


-24.0% 
-25.5% 


(continued) 


1186 Statistics Summary 


Bear Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Bull Market, Market, Up Down Down 
Description Up Breakout Breakout Breakout Breakout 
Rectangle top 50.9% 24.4% -12.6% 
Roof 34.3% -15.4% 
Roof, inverted 33.8% -14.0% 
Rounding bottom 47.8% 37.1% 
Rounding top 54.6% 23.0% -17.2% -20.6% 
Scallop, ascending 42.1% 23.4% -14.7% 
Scallop, ascending 45.1% 28.4% 
and inverted 
Scallop, descending 39.1% -15.9% -23.4% 
Scallop, descending 47.0% -16.0% -22.0% 
and inverted 
Three falling peaks -14.9% -22.8% 
Three peaks and domed house 
Three rising valleys 48.0% 24.4% 
Triangle, ascending 43.0% -12.8% 
Triangle, descending 37.8% 30.3% -15.5% -21.4% 
Triangle, symmetrical 34.2% 26.1% -12.3% -19.1% 
Triple bottom 45.6% 26.6% 
Triple top -14.4% -22.3% 
V bottom 39.5% 32.0% 
V bottom, extended 39.5% 33.4% 
V top -15.0% -23.6% 
V top, extended -18.4% -25.7% 
Wedge, falling 38.3% 26.2% -13.8% 
Wedge, rising 37.9% -9.1% -16.9% 
Wolfe wave, bearish -11.8% -18.6% 
Wolfe wave, bullish 34.8% 32.5% 
Average for patterns 42.4% 28.1% -14.9% -22.2% 


without * or ** 


*These have a special measure and are not comparable to the other chart patterns. 
**These use the weekly or monthly scale and are not comparable to those that use the daily scale. 


Alphabetical, Performance Rank (1 is best), Daily Scale 


Bear Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Bull Market, Market, Up Down Down 
Description Up Breakout Breakout Breakout Breakout 
Big M 8 10 
Big W 11 8 


Broadening bottom 15 23 


Description 


Broadening formation, 
right-angled and ascending 


Broadening formation, 
right-angled and descending 


Broadening top 


Broadening wedge, ascending 
Broadening wedge, descending 


Bump-and-run reversal, top 


Bump-and-run reversal, bottom 


Cup with handle 
Cup with handle, inverted 
Diamond bottom 


Diamond top 


Double bottom, Adam & Adam 


Double bottom, Adam & Eve 
Double bottom, Eve & Adam 
Double bottom, Eve & Eve 
Double top, Adam & Adam 
Double top, Adam & Eve 
Double top, Eve & Adam 
Double top, Eve & Eve 

Flag, high tight 
Head-and-shoulders bottom 


Head-and-shoulders 
bottom, complex 


Head-and-shoulders top 


Head-and-shoulders 
top, complex 


Island bottom 
Island top 
Rectangle bottom 
Rectangle top 
Roof 

Roof, inverted 
Rounding bottom 
Rounding top 
Scallop, ascending 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


18 


19 


30 
13 


38 


20 


Scallop, ascending and inverted 14 


Statistics Summary 1187 


Bear 
Market, Up 
Breakout 


14 


15 
10 


20 


16 


19 
18 


Bull Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


25 


18 


19 
10 
16 
12 


22 


Bear Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


14 


16 


(continued) 


1188 


Description 


Scallop, descending 
Scallop, descending 


and inverted 
Three falling peaks 
Three rising valleys 


Triangle, ascending 
Triangle, descending 
Triangle, symmetrical 


Triple bottom 
Triple top 
V bottom 


V bottom, extended 


V top 

V top, extended 
Wedge, falling 
Wedge, rising 


Wolfe wave, bearish 


Wolfe wave, bullish 


Max Rank 


Alphabetical, Performance Rank (1 


Description 


AB=CD, bearish 
AB=CD, bullish 
Bat, bearish 
Bat, bullish 
Butterfly, bearish 
Butterfly, bullish 
Crab, bearish 
Crab, bullish 
Gartley, bearish 
Gartley, bullish 
Max rank 


Statistics Summary 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


29 
9 


34 
39 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


Bear 
Market, Up 
Breakout 


16 


12 


20 


Bull Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


12 
10 


21 
30 
15 
34 


24 


36 


Bear Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


6 
13 


17 


10 


18 


19 


is best), Fibonacci Patterns Only 


Bear 
Market, Up 
Breakout 


Bull Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


5 


Bear Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


3 


Statistics Summary 


Alphabetical, Performance Rank (1 is best), Weekly Patterns Only 


Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout —_Up Breakout 


Bull Market, 
Down Breakout 


1189 


Bear Market, 
Down Breakout 


Diving board 1 


Horn bottom 2 1 
Horn top 
Pipe bottom 3 2 
Pipe top 


Top Ten Best Performing Patterns, Bull Market, Up Breakout 


Description Average Rise Failures 
Bump-and-run reversal, bottom 55.1% 9.4% 
Rounding top 54.6% 8.9% 
Cup with handle 53.6% 5.3% 
Rectangle top 50.9% 15.4% 
Double bottom, Eve & Eve 49.7% 11.7% 
Three rising valleys 48.0% 9.7% 
Rounding bottom 47.8% 4.3% 
Rectangle bottom 47.6% 15.1% 
Head-and-shoulders bottom, complex 47.0% 6.6% 
Scallop, descending and inverted 47.0% 16.0% 


Top Ten Best Performing Patterns, Bear Market, Up Breakout 


Description Average Rise Failures 
Rounding bottom 37.1% 6.0% 
Bump-and-run reversal, bottom 34.7% 10.3% 
V bottom, extended 33.4% 7.4% 
Wolfe wave, bullish 32.5% 5.2% 
V bottom 32.0% 14.1% 
Head-and-shoulders bottom, complex 31.6% 12.2% 
Triangle, descending 30.3% 21.7% 
Big W 29.6% 9.3% 
Scallop, ascending and inverted 28.4% 9.0% 
Head-and-shoulders bottom 28.2% 9.4% 


1190 Statistics Summary 


Top Ten Best Performing Patterns, Bull Market, Down Breakout 


Description Average Decline Failures 
Diamond bottom -19.1% 15.1% 
V top, extended -18.4% 15.0% 
Rounding top -17.2% 20.1% 
Diamond top -17.2% 15.0% 
Bump-and-run reversal, top -17.2% 13.6% 
Cup with handle inverted -17.1% 17.6% 
Head-and-shoulders top, complex -16.7% 18.1% 
Big M -16.6% 14.3% 
Head-and-shoulders top -16.1% 18.8% 
Scallop, descending and inverted -16.0% 17.0% 


Top Ten Best Performing Patterns, Bear Market, Down Breakout 


Description Average Decline Failures 
V top, extended -25.7% 5.1% 
Rectangle bottom -25.5% 6.3% 
Bump-and-run reversal, top -24.2% 6.8% 
Head-and-shoulders top -23.7% 5.2% 
V top -23.6% 14.3% 
Scallop, descending -23.4% 7.1% 
Cup with handle inverted -23.0% 8.8% 
Three falling peaks -22.8% 7.4% 
Head-and-shoulders top, complex -22.6% 7.0% 
Big M -22.3% 8.1% 


Alphabetical List, Failure Rates (lower percentage is better) 


Bear Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Bull Market, Market, Up Down Down 
Description Up Breakout Breakout Breakout Breakout 
AB=CD, bearish* 26.3% 10.2% 
AB=CD, bullish* 11.6% 3.7% 
Bat, bearish* 17.7% 4.5% 
Bat, bullish* 10.2% 4.3% 
Big M 14.3% 8.1% 
Big W 9.3% 9.3% 
Broadening bottom 16.4% 26.2% 
Broadening formation, 15.1% 28.4% 


right-angled and 
ascending 


Statistics Summary 1191 


Bear Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Bull Market, Market, Up Down Down 

Description Up Breakout Breakout Breakout Breakout 
Broadening formation, right- 20.8% 23.0% 

angled and descending 
Broadening top 18.0% 17.5% 27.2% 9.3% 
Broadening wedge, 15.2% 31.0% 

ascending 
Broadening wedge, 17.9% 34.9% 

descending 
Bump-and-run 9.4% 10.3% 

reversal, bottom 
Bump-and-run reversal, top 13.6% 6.8% 
Butterfly, bearish* 27.3% 7.6% 
Butterfly, bullish* 11.4% 2.6% 
Cloudbank** 
Crab, bearish* 19.8% 8.9% 
Crab, bullish* 7.1% 2.6% 
Cup with handle 5.3% 
Cup with handle, inverted 17.6% 8.8% 
Diamond bottom 13.1% 15.1% 
Diamond top 20.9% 15.0% 
Diving board** 4.0% 
Double bottom, 16.4% 

Adam & Adam 
Double bottom, Adam & Eve 12.3% 
Double bottom, Eve & Adam _ 11.6% 
Double bottom, Eve & Eve 11.7% 
Double top, Adam & Adam 24.7% 
Double top, Adam & Eve 20.7% 
Double top, Eve & Adam 21.5% 
Double top, Eve & Eve 20.0% 
Flag, high tight 15.1% 19.5% 
Flag 
Gap 
Gartley, bearish* 21.5% 7.3% 
Gartley, bullish* 13.5% 5.9% 
Head-and-shoulders bottom 10.5% 9.4% 
Head-and-shoulders 6.6% 12.2% 

bottom, complex 
Head-and-shoulders top 18.8% 5.2% 
Head-and-shoulders 18.1% 7.0% 


top, complex 


(continued) 


1192 Statistics Summary 


Description 


Horn bottom** 
Horn top** 
Island bottom 
Island tops 


Measured move down 


Measured move up 
Pennant 

Pipe bottom** 
Pipe top** 
Rectangle bottom 
Rectangle top 
Roof 

Roof, inverted 
Rounding bottom 
Rounding top 
Scallop, ascending 


Scallop, ascending 
and inverted 


Scallop, descending 


Scallop, descending 
and inverted 


Three falling peaks 


Three peaks and 
domed house 


Three rising valleys 


Triangle, ascending 


Triangle, descending 
Triangle, symmetrical 


Triple bottom 
Triple tops 

V bottom 

V bottom extended 
V top 

V top extended 
Wedge, falling 
Wedge, rising 
Wolfe wave, bearish 
Wolfe wave, bullish 


Average for patterns 
without * or ** 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


6.0% 


31.0% 


8.0% 


15.1% 
15.4% 
25.7% 
23.1% 
4.3% 
8.9% 
10.9% 
9.5% 


14.1% 
16.0% 


9.7% 

17.0% 
22.1% 
25.4% 
13.3% 


18.9% 
10.4% 
25.7% 


19.4% 


15.2% 
15.3% 


Bear 
Market, Up 
Breakout 


9.0% 


29.7% 


8.0% 


15.2% 


6.0% 
17.3% 
17.8% 
9.0% 


12.1% 
21.7% 
23.4% 
12.7% 
14.1% 
7.4% 


23.9% 


5.2% 
14.7% 


Bull Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


9.0% 


33.7% 


13.0% 
24.3% 
34.3% 
21.6% 
25.1% 


20.1% 
23.2% 


17.8% 
17.0% 


22.5% 


38.2% 
23.2% 
36.9% 


25.3% 


29.2% 
15.0% 
29.2% 
51.4% 
29.6% 


24.7% 


Bear Market, 
Down 
Breakout 


3.0% 


13.8% 


5.0% 
6.3% 


11.9% 


7.1% 
10.0% 


7.4% 


13.0% 
19.3% 


7.7% 


14.3% 


5.1% 


27.7% 
13.4% 


10.6% 


*These have a special measure and are not comparable to the other chart patterns. 
**These use the weekly or monthly scale and are not comparable to those that use the daily scale. 


Statistics Summary 1193 


Alphabetical, Failure Rate Rank (1, best, means fewest failures), Daily Scale 


Bear Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Bull Market, Market, Up Down Down 
Description Up Breakout Breakout Breakout Breakout 
Big M 2 9 
Big W 5 5 
Broadening bottom 25 24 
Broadening formation, 18 26 
right-angled 
and ascending 
Broadening formation, 32 17 
right-angled and 
descending 
Broadening top 29 14 25 11 
Broadening 21 30 
wedge, ascending 
Broadening wedge, 28 33 
descending 
Bump-and-run reversal, top 6 7 
Bump-and-run 1 4 
reversal, bottom 
Cup with handle 2 
Cup with handle, inverted 10 
Diamond bottom 15 
Diamond top 33 
Double bottom, 25 
Adam & Adam 
Double bottom, 14 
Adam & Eve 
Double bottom, 12 
Eve & Adam 
Double bottom, Eve & Eve 13 
Double top, Adam & Adam 21 
Double top, Adam & Eve 13 
Double top, Eve & Adam 14 
Double top, Eve & Eve 11 
Flag, high tight 18 16 
Head-and-shoulders bottom 10 6 
Head-and-shoulders 3 9 
bottom, complex 
Head-and-shoulders top 10 
Head-and-shoulders 9 
top, complex 
Island bottom 39 20 
Island tops 31 16 
Rectangle bottom 18 20 3 


(continued) 


1194 Statistics Summary 


Description 


Rectangle top 
Roof 

Roof, inverted 
Rounding bottom 
Rounding top 
Scallop, ascending 


Scallop, ascending 
and inverted 


Scallop, descending 


Scallop, descending 
and inverted 


Three falling peaks 
Three rising valleys 
Triangle, ascending 
Triangle, descending 
Triangle, symmetrical 
Triple bottom 

Triple top 

V bottom 

V bottom extended 
V top 

V top extended 
Wedge, falling 
Wedge, rising 

Wolfe wave, bearish 
Wolfe wave, bullish 
Max Rank 


Bull Market, 
Up Breakout 


Bull Market, Bear Market, 


Bear 
Market, Up Down 
Breakout Breakout 
12 32 
15 
22 
2 
13 12 
15 18 
4 
8 
6 
16 
8 
35 
17 18 
18 34 
10 
23 
11 
3 
27 
3 
19 27 
36 
29 
1 
20 36 


Down 
Breakout 


13 


14 
18 


15 


19 


Alphabetical, Failure Rate Rank (1 is fewest failures), Fibonacci Patterns Only 


Bear 
Bull Market, Market, Up Bull Market, Bear Market, 

Description Up Breakout Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
AB=CD bearish 4 5 

AB=CD bullish 4 3 

Bat bearish 1 1 

Bat bullish 2 4 

Butterfly bearish 5 3 


Butterfly bullish 3 


Statistics Summary 1195 


Bear 

Bull Market, Market, Up Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Up Breakout Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 
Crab, bearish 2 4 
Crab, bullish 1 1 
Gartley, bearish 3 2 
Gartley, bullish 5 
Max rank 5 5 5 5 


Alphabetical, Failure Rate Rank (1 is fewest failures), Weekly Patterns 


Bull Market, Up Bear Market, Bull Market, Bear Market, 
Description Breakout Up Breakout Down Breakout Down Breakout 


Diving board 1 


Horn bottom 2 2 
Horn top 1 1 
Pipe bottom 3 1 
Pipe top 2 2 


Top Ten Fewest Failures, Bull Market, Up Breakout 


Description Average Rise Failures 
Rounding bottom 47.8% 4.3% 
Cup with handle 53.6% 5.3% 
Head-and-shoulders bottom, complex 47.0% 6.6% 
Rounding top 54.6% 8.9% 
Big W 46.1% 9.3% 
Bump-and-run reversal, bottom 55.1% 9.4% 
Scallop, ascending and inverted 45.1% 9.5% 
Three rising valleys 48.0% 9.7% 
V bottom extended 39.5% 10.4% 
Head-and-shoulders bottom 45.2% 10.5% 


Top Ten Fewest Failures, Bear Market, Up Breakout 


Description Average Rise Failures 
Wolfe wave, bullish 32.5% 5.2% 
Rounding bottom 37.1% 6.0% 
V bottom, extended 33.4% 7.4% 
Scallop, ascending and inverted 28.4% 9.0% 
Big W 29.6% 9.3% 


(continued) 


1196 Statistics Summary 


Description Average Rise Failures 
Head-and-shoulders bottom 28.2% 9.4% 
Bump-and-run reversal, bottom 34.7% 10.3% 
Three rising valleys 24.4% 12.1% 
Head-and-shoulders bottom, complex 31.6% 12.2% 
Triple bottom 26.6% 12.7% 


Top Ten Fewest Failures, Bull Market, Down Breakout 


Description Average Decline Failures 
Bump-and-run reversal, top -17.2% 13.6% 
Big M -16.6% 14.3% 
Diamond top -17.2% 15.0% 
V top, extended -18.4% 15.0% 
Diamond bottom -19.1% 15.1% 
Scallop, descending and inverted -16.0% 17.0% 
Cup with handle, inverted -17.1% 17.6% 
Scallop, descending -15.9% 17.8% 
Head-and-shoulders top, complex -16.7% 18.1% 
Head-and-shoulders top -16.1% 18.8% 


Top Ten Fewest Failures, Bear Market, Down Breakout 


Description Average Decline Failures 
V top extended -25.7% 5.1% 
Head-and-shoulders top -23.7% 5.2% 
Rectangle bottom -25.5% 6.3% 
Bump-and-run reversal, top -24.2% 6.8% 
Head-and-shoulders top, complex -22.6% 7.0% 
Scallop, descending -23.4% 7.1% 
Three falling peaks -22.8% 74% 
Triple top -22.3% 7.7% 
Big M -22.3% 8.1% 
Cup with handle, inverted -23.0% 8.8% 


Glossary 


The statistics in this book use hundreds or thousands of perfect trades (buying 
at the breakout price and selling at the ultimate high or ultimate low). The 
likelihood of duplicating that in actual trading is zero. Thus, do not expect 
your trades to perform as well as the “average” statistics in this book. You may 
do better (or worse). Rather, use the statistics as tools to help gauge how well 
the pattern you are about to trade will perform when compared to other chart 
patterns in this book. 

The following tables appear in most chapters. X is the chapter number 
(such as ‘Table x.2 where x is the chapter number). Beside each table entry is 
an explanation. 

Following that is a glossary of terms. Time is measured in calendar days, 
not price bars or trading days unless otherwise noted. 

Often in this book, Pll write something like “compared to all other chart 
pattern types.” That does not include Fibonacci patterns or those on a time 
scale longer than daily. 


Results Snapshot (sorted by breakout direction and market condition) 


Description Explanation 
Reversal or A three-part phrase: term, bullish/bearish, reversal/continuation. 
continuation Term (short, intermediate, long) is set by the number of days to 


the ultimate high or low. Bullish for upward breakouts, bearish 
for downward ones. Reversal/continuation depends on which 
happens more often. 

Performance rank A numerical rank of the average rise or decline from the breakout 
to the ultimate high or low, respectively, when compared to 
other patterns on the associated time scale (daily, weekly). 

Breakeven failure rate A percentage of how often price fails to rise (upward breakouts) or 
decline (downward breakouts) more than 5% on the way to the 
ultimate high or low, respectively. 


1197 


1198 Glossary 


Description 


Explanation 


Average rise/decline 

Volume trend 

Throwbacks/ 
pullbacks 


Percentage meeting 
price target 


Description 


A percentage calculated from the breakout price to the ultimate 
high (upward breakouts) or low (downward breakouts). 

The slope of the line found using linear regression to determine 
the volume trend from the start of the pattern to its end. 

A percentage telling how often a throwback or pullback happens 
after the breakout. 

Tells how often price reaches the full height measure rule target. 


Table x.2 
General Statistics 


Explanation 


Number found 


Reversal (R), continua- 
tion (C) occurrence 


Reversal, continuation 
performance 


Average rise/decline 


Standard & Poor's 
500 change 


Days to ultimate 
high or low 


How many 
change trend? 


Maximum Price Rise 
or Decline (%) 


The number of chart patterns found in Bulkowski’s database. 

The percentage of time the chart pattern acted as a reversal or 
continuation of the prevailing price trend. 

The percentage move from breakout price to ultimate high or low 
price for those chart patterns acting as reversals and continuations. 

The average rise or decline from the breakout price to the ulti- 
mate high or low price. 

How the index performed if held from the date of the chart pat- 
tern’s breakout to the date of the ultimate high or low. 

The number of days from the breakout to the ultimate 
high or low. 

A percentage of patterns that see price move more than 20% 
from the breakout price to the ultimate high or low price. 
The intent is to show how many patterns see price trend after 
the breakout. 


Table x.3 
Cumulative Failure Rates 


Explanation 


5 (breakeven) 


10 (or 15, 20, .. .) 


A count and percentage of how often price fails to rise (decline) 
more than 5% after the breakout. Also called the breakeven 
failure rate. 

A count and percentage of how often price fails to rise (decline) 
more than 10%, 15%, and so on, after the breakout. 


Glossary 1199 


Table x.4 


Breakout and Post-Breakout Statistics 


Description 


Explanation 


Breakout direction 


Performance of breakouts 
occurring near the 
12-month low (L), middle 
(M) or high (H) 

Median breakout distance 
to apex 


Throwback/pullback 
occurrence 


Average time to throwback/ 
pullback peaks 


Average time to throwback/ 
pullback ends 


Average rise/decline for 
patterns with throw- 
backs/pullbacks 


Average rise/decline for 
patterns without throw- 
backs/pullbacks 


Percentage price 
resumes trend 


Performance with break- 
out day gap 


Performance without break- 
out day gap 


Average gap size 


A percentage of how often price breaks out upward 
or downward. 


The average rise/decline from breakout price to ultimate 
high/low price sorted by where the breakout price 
appears in the yearly high-low price range. 


Only appears for triangles and wedges. A ratio expressed 
as a percentage of the distance from the start of the 
chart pattern to the breakout versus the length of the 
chart pattern from start to apex, measured in calendar 
days. The median is reported for all chart patterns of a 
given type. 


A percentage of the number of throwbacks/pullbacks 
occurring versus the number of chart patterns found. 


The percentage move and number of days before price 
begins to return to the breakout price during a throw- 
back or pullback. 


The average time from breakout to the stock returning to 
(or comes close to) the breakout price for those patterns 
with throwbacks or pullbacks. It’s the round-trip time for 
price to complete a throwback or pullback. 


The average rise/decline for those patterns with throw- 
backs/pullbacks. 


The average rise/decline for those patterns without throw- 
backs/pullbacks. 


Tells how often price resumes trending in the breakout 
direction (either up or down) after completing a throw- 
back or pullback. 


The average rise/decline for those patterns with gaps on 
the day of breakout. This uses the opening price the 
day after a gap as the entry price in the measure to the 
ultimate high or low. 


The average rise/decline for those patterns without gaps on 
the day of breakout. 


For patterns with breakout day gaps, this is the average 
height of the gap. 


1200 Glossary 


Description 


Table x.5 
Size Statistics 


Explanation 


Tall pattern performance 

Short pattern performance 

Median height as a percentage of 
breakout price 

Narrow pattern performance 


Wide pattern performance 


Median width 
Height and width performance 


Description 


The average rise/decline for patterns taller than the 
median height. 


The average rise/decline for patterns equal to or 
shorter than the median height. 


The median of the height divided by the 
breakout price. 


The average rise/decline for patterns equal to or nar- 
rower than the median width. 


The average rise/decline for patterns wider than the 
median width. 


The median width from pattern start to end. 


The average rise/decline for the four combinations of 
pattern height and width. 


Table x.6 


Volume Statistics 


Explanation 


Volume trend 


The percentage and direction volume trends most often (such 


as: 69% down) from the start to end of the chart pattern as 
found using linear regression. 


Rising/falling volume 
trend performance 


Heavy/light breakout 
volume performance 


Performance of chart patterns sorted by a rising or falling 
volume trend. 


Average performance of patterns with breakout day volume 
higher/lower than the 30-day average (not including the 


breakout day). 


Table x.7 


How Often Stops Hit 


Description 


Location 


Explanation 


For upward breakouts, tells how far into the chart pattern price 
dropped between the breakout and ultimate high. For down- 
ward breakouts, tells how far price climbed into the chart pattern 
between the breakout and ultimate low. See Figure G3 and Stops. 


Glossary 1201 


Table x.8 
Performance and Failures Over Time for Bull Markets (Bear markets only 
appeared in the 2000s and are not included in the table or in the statistics.) 


Description Explanation 


Decade The performance of the chart pattern from breakout to ultimate 
high/low, sorted by the breakout date, by decade. 


Performance (above), Failures (below) 


Decade The breakeven failure rate sorted by the breakout date, by decade. 
Table x.9 
Busted Patterns 
Description Bull Market 
Busted pat- A count of the number of busted patterns as a percentage of 
terns count all chart patterns for the given type (such as a percentage of 


ascending triangles). 
Single/double/triple+ A count and percentage of patterns that bust once, twice, and 


bust count more than twice (triple+). See Figure G1 and Busted pattern. 
Performance for all The average rise/decline for all types (single/double/triple+) of 
busted patterns busted patterns. 
Single busted For patterns that bust only once, measured from the top/bottom 
performance of the pattern opposite the original breakout to the ultimate 


high/low. For example, a single busted double top measures the 
rise from the top of the pattern to the ultimate high. 


Non-busted The performance of similar patterns that do not bust. 
performance 
Table x.10 
Trading Tactics 
Description Bull Market 
Percentage reaching The percentage of time price meets or exceeds a target that is 
0.25 to 3 times a multiple of the pattern’s height usually added to the top or 
height target subtracted from the bottom of the pattern or breakout price. 
Terminology 


5% failure rate See breakeven failure rate. 

Average The sum of scores divided by the number of scores. 

Average rise or decline The rise measured from the breakout price to 
the ultimate high, or the decline measured from the breakout price to the ulti- 
mate low, for each stock, and then computing the average. 


1202 — Glossary 


Bear market The decline in the Standard & Poor’s 500 index from 24 
March 2000 to 10 October 2002 and from 12 October 2007 to 6 March 2009. 

Board The horizontal or flat portion of a diving board pattern, often last- 
ing from weeks to months. It occurs before the plunge. 

Breakeven failure rate A percentage of the patterns that fail to rise or 
decline more than 5% after the breakout. Breakeven assumes the 5% move will 
cover the cost of trading (slippage, fees, commissions, and so on). 

Breakout When price c/oses outside a trendline boundary or above/below 
the pattern’s high/low, a breakout occurs. What constitutes a breakout can vary 
from pattern type to pattern type. 

Breakout gap, breakout day gap A gap that may occur on the breakout 
day. Usually it is a breakaway gap, one that shows high volume after leaving a 
consolidation area. 

Breakout price The price at which a stock breaks out of a chart pattern. 
Performance measures involving the breakout price use the opening price the 
day after the breakout. If a trading order is used (like a buy stop), a trade will 
execute at the higher of the buy stop or opening price (for upward breakouts) 
or at the lower of the limit order or opening price (downward breakouts). 

Breakout volume The volume on the breakout day. The breakout day’s 
volume is compared to the average volume over the prior 30 days (not includ- 
ing the breakout day). 

Bull market Every date outside of the bear markets as posted by the 
Standard & Poor’s 500 index. See bear market for specific time periods. 

Busted pattern Chart patterns that reach the ultimate high or low less 
than or equal to 10% away from the breakout price before reversing and clos- 
ing beyond the side opposite the breakout. 


Figure G1 shows an example. Price forms a triple top at ABC. It con- 
firms as a valid chart pattern when the stock closes below the bot- 
tom of the chart pattern at D. Price bottoms the next day (having 
declined less than 10% below the breakout price) before reversing. 
Price climbs and closes above the top of the chart pattern, at E, bust- 
ing the downward breakout. If price continues to rise more than 10% 
above A (the top of the chart pattern), the triple top becomes a single 
busted pattern. 

In this case, price did not rise more than 10% above A. Instead, the stock 
dropped and closed below the bottom of the chart pattern at F. This 
busted the chart pattern for the second time. If price continued down 
more than 10% below the bottom of the chart pattern, then the triple 
top would be classified as a double busted pattern. 

Instead, price dropped less than 10% and reversed again to close above 
the top of the chart pattern at G. This busted the chart pattern for the 
third time. The count of busts stopped at three, so this triple top is a 
triple+ busted pattern even though it has more than three busts. 


Glossary 1203 


Honeywell International Inc (HON) 
a Wa. 
Tie iN bl 
| ne | \ 
" x ‘ | 
{ | \! i} on 
| } — 54 


07 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan08 Feb Mar Apr May 


Figure G1 This triple top busts more than three times but is called a triple busted 
pattern. 


Busted pattern performance After a pattern busts, the performance 
measures how far price moves in the new direction, from the top or bottom of 
the chart pattern to the ultimate high or low, respectively. See Busted pattern 
and Figure G1. 

Closing the gap Price forms a gap but succeeding price movement spans 
the gap to cover it. 

Confirmation point, price, or level A price or location that validates a 
chart pattern. Also known as the breakout point, price, or level. 

Consolidation A sideways move or a region in which price switches from 
trending to moving sideways. 

Contact If you would like to contact Mr. Bulkowski, e-mail him at tbul@ 
hotmail.com or visit his website at http://ThePatternSite.com. 

Continuation When price breaks out in the same direction as it entered 
a chart pattern. For example, if the prevailing price trend is upward into a chart 
pattern and exits out the top, the pattern acts as a continuation of the uptrend. 
Contrast with reversal. 

Corrective phase Part of a measured move up or down, a region where 
price retraces a portion of the prior move. 

Countertrend When price moves against the prevailing market trend. 
Downward breakouts in bull markets or upward breakouts in bear markets are 
countertrends. 

Countertrend pattern A pattern with an upward breakout in bear mar- 
kets or a downward breakout in bull markets; that is, the breakout direction is 
against the prevailing market trend. 

Days to ultimate high or low The average time from the breakout date 
to the date of the ultimate high or low, measured in calendar days. 


1204 ~— Glossary 


Double bust Price busts a chart pattern twice. See Busted pattern and 
Figure Gl. 

Dual bumps In a bump-and-run reversal, price bumps up (or down) and 
then returns to the trendline two or more times. 

End (as in “pattern end”) Usually the highest high or lowest low in a 
chart pattern. For example, the start and end of a double bottom is the lowest 
low in each valley. 

Failure rate A count of how many patterns fail to see price rise or decline 
a selected amount (like 5%, 10% and so on). 

Flagpole A strong vertical move, either up or down, where price has little 
or no overlap for several days. Associated with flags and pennants. 

Flat base A consolidation region in which price touches, or comes near 
to, the same price level multiple times over several weeks or months. The bot- 
tom or top of this region may appear flat and sometimes forms the base of an 
impending up move, hence the name, “flat base.” 

Formation Synonym for chart pattern. 

Frequency distribution A method to assign data to one of several non- 
overlapping intervals. A frequency distribution shows how often values occur. 
For example, if you empty your pockets and count the change, you may have 
three pennies and two nickels. That’s a frequency distribution, a count of how 
many pennies and how many nickels you have. 

Gap A vertical space between two price bars on the chart. For upward 
price trends, a gap happens when today’s low price is above yesterday’s high. 
For downward price trends, a gap occurs when today’s high price is below 
yesterday’s low. 

Gap performance A measure of how well a chart pattern performs with 
or without a gap. Computed using the opening price the day after a gap to the 
ultimate high or ultimate low. 

Handle performance The rise (or decline) to the ultimate high (or low) 
from handles shorter or longer than the median handle length in a cup-with- 
handle pattern. The handle measures from the right cup lip to the breakout. 

Handle retrace For inverted cup with handles, the rise from the right 
cup low to the handle high as a percentage of the cup height from the right lip 
to the highest high in the pattern. 

Hard stop A stop-loss order placed with a broker for execution. Contrast 
with Mental stop. 

Heavy left/right volume performance A comparison of volume sur- 
rounding peaks or valleys using 2 days before to 2 days after the peak or valley. 

Hold time loss The maximum amount of money you might lose if you 
sold at the worst time during a trade. 

Internal partial decline The same as a partial decline except the breakout 
fails to occur and the chart pattern continues developing. Look for two consec- 
utive trendline touches that occur on the same side with a minor low between 
them (looking like a loop hanging below the trendline). The minor low should 


Glossary 1205 


Partial Rise 


Partial 
Decline 


Throwback Internal Partial Rise 


Partial Rise Failure 


\ Ay 3 4 Pullback 
3 4 / 

1 > ih, 
Whitespace 


Internal Partial Decline Whitespace 


Figure G2_ Clockwise from upper left: A partial decline and partial rise give 
advance notice of the breakout direction. An internal partial rise or decline wrongly 
predicts the breakout direction. Pullbacks and throwbacks occur after the break- 
out when the stock returns to the breakout price or trendline within 30 days and 
shows whitespace during the retrace. Minor lows are points 1 and 2; minor highs 
are points 3 and 4. 


not come close to or touch the opposite trendline. An internal partial decline 
only occurs after the chart pattern is valid, meaning it complies with all identi- 
fication guidelines. See Figure G2. 

Internal partial rise Occurs within a chart pattern after price touches a 
lower trendline, rises, and then returns to the lower trendline without com- 
ing close to or touching the opposite trendline. A breakout does not follow. 
Look for two consecutive trendline touches to occur on the same side with a 
minor high between them (looking like a pimple on the trendline). An internal 
partial rise is the same as a partial rise (see that entry) except a breakout does 
not follow and the chart pattern continues developing. An internal partial rise 
only occurs after the chart pattern is valid, meaning it meets all identification 
guidelines. See Figure G2. 

Knot A place in a trend where price moves horizontally for at least 3 days. 
When in an uptrend and located close to a downward breakout, a knot can act 
as support and cause a pullback. See Chapter 1, Figure 1.8. 

Launch price The price at which a strong trend starts that leads to the 
beginning of a chart pattern. Often associated with diamonds, big M, and big 
W patterns. Price will sometimes bottom just above the launch price before 
reversing. 

Lead-in height The height from the trendline to the highest high (or 
lowest low) in the first quarter of a bump-and-run reversal. 


1206 — Glossary 


Limit order An order to a broker where you specify that you will buy for 
no more or sell for no less than a specific price. 

Linear regression A method that fits a straight line to a series of num- 
bers; the slope of the resulting line gives the trend. Used to find whether vol- 
ume is trending upward or downward over the course of the chart pattern, 
from start to end, not to the breakout. 

Maximum price rise or decline Used as the non-overlapping intervals 
for a frequency distribution of failure rates, this is an arbitrary list of bench- 
mark values (such as 5%, 10%, 15%, and so on). 

Measure rule Varies from pattern to pattern but is usually the pattern’s 
height added to (upward breakouts) or subtracted from (downward breakouts) 
the breakout price. The result is the predicted price target. See “Percent meet- 
ing price target” in the Results Snapshot of each chapter for how often price 
hits their predicted targets. Also included in Table x.10. 

Median The middle value in a sorted list of numbers such that half the 
values are below the median and half above. If no middle value exists, the aver- 
age of the two closest values is used. For example, in the list 10, 15, 30, 41, and 
52, the median is 30 because there are two values on either side of it. 

Mental stop A stop-loss order kept in your head instead of being placed 
with a broker. Day traders, for example, may use a mental stop and sell when 
the time is right instead of letting a hard stop force an exit. Contrast with 
Hard stop. 

Minor high A price peak usually separated from other peaks by at least 5 
price bars. Points 3 and 4 in Figure G2 are minor highs. 

Minor low A price valley usually separated from other valleys by at least 
5 price bars. Points 1 and 2 in Figure G2 are minor lows. 

Narrow pattern Measured from the chart pattern’s start to end, this is 
the pattern’s width, in calendar days. Patterns longer than the median length 
are wide; shorter than the median are narrow. See Table x.5. 

Neckline A trendline joining the armpits of a head-and-shoulders pattern. 
A close below/above the neckline signals a breakout from the chart pattern. 

Overshoot Price sometimes overshoots the top of the pattern within two 
weeks before entering a chart pattern. Overshoots are not included in the cal- 
culation of the trend start. Figure G4 shows an example overshoot at F. Price 
forms a symmetrical triangle (E) and price rises into the chart pattern from the 
low at D. At F, price overshoots the start of the triangle, which could interfere 
with the determination of where the trend starts. 

Partial decline After price touches a top trendline, price declines but 
does not touch (or come that close to) a lower trendline before forming a 
distinct minor low and usually staging an immediate upward breakout. Partial 
declines must begin before the actual breakout and form after a valid chart 
pattern appears (after the chart pattern meets all identification guidelines). See 
Figure G2. 


Glossary 1207 


3M Company (MMM) 


la 4 cf - 134 
15 Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan16 Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug 


Figure G3 How stop-loss orders are triggered as price rises to the ultimate high. 


Partial decline failure A partial decline that occurs but the breakout 
does not follow immediately or is in the wrong direction. 

Partial rise After price touches a lower trendline, price rises but does not 
touch (or come that close to) the upper trendline before forming a distinct 
minor high and usually staging an immediate downward breakout. The partial 
rise must begin before the breakout and form near the end of a valid chart 
pattern (after the pattern meets all identification guidelines). See Figure G2. 

Partial rise failure A partial rise occurs but the breakout does not follow 
immediately or is in the wrong direction. See Figure G2. 

Percentage meeting price target Tells how often price meets or 
exceeds the price target found using the full height of the chart pattern in the 
measure rule. 

Performance rank A ranking of the average rise or decline for each chart 
pattern, sorted by breakout direction and market condition (bull/bear) where 
a rank of 1 is the highest performance. 

Plunge A steep drop in a stock as part of a diving board pattern, meas- 
ured from the end of the board to the subsequent low. Often lasting from 
several weeks to months. Recovery is often V-shaped. 

Position trader A trader who holds a position for days, weeks, or longer, 
following a longer term trend. Contrast with Swing trader. 

Premature breakout When price moves or closes outside the pattern’s 
trendline boundary but quickly returns. A premature breakout cannot be dis- 
tinguished from a valid breakout when it occurs. The second and succeeding 
editions of this book assume a premature breakout is the actual breakout when 
computing statistics. 


1208 — Glossary 


Pullback A retrace after a downward breakout. Price returns to, or comes 
very close to, the breakout price or trendline within 30 days after the breakout. 
Whitespace must appear between the hooking price action of the pullback and 
the breakout price. This rule prevents the pullback term being applied to price 
clustering near the breakout price. See Figure G2. 

Reversal The movement of price when it enters and exits the chart pat- 
tern from the same side. Price reverses the prevailing price trend from up to 
down or down to up. Contrast with Continuation. 

Single bust A chart pattern that fails to see price move more than 10% 
in the breakout direction before reversing and closing above/below the end 
opposite the breakout direction and then moving more than 10% away. See 
Busted pattern and Figure G1. 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change The change in the S&P 500 index using 
the dates of the chart pattern breakout and ultimate high or low. 

Stop-loss order. A trading order to buy at a price above (buy stop) or sell 
at a price below (stop loss) the current market price. 

Stops (How often stops hit, Table x.7). Short for stop-loss order. To 
understand how often a stop is hit, look at the double bottom in Figure G3. 
A double bottom chart pattern appears at AB, with the top of the pattern at C. 
When price closes above C (which happens at D), the double bottom confirms 
as a valid double bottom. My computer finds the lowest low on the way to the 
ultimate high in relation to the chart pattern. In this example, the ultimate 
high isn’t shown because it’s off the scale. On the way to the ultimate high, the 
stock drops to E. 


A stop placed at the top or middle of the chart pattern would be hit. 
However, a stop placed at the price of the low at A (the lower of the 
two bottoms), would not trigger because E didn’t drop down to the 
price of A. 

I checked each chart pattern and counted how often price dropped into 
the chart pattern on the way to the ultimate high, like that shown. In a 
similar manner, I counted the number of times price climbed into the 
chart pattern on the way to the ultimate low (that is, for downward 
breakouts). 

Stop placement using this method could not be used for patterns like ris- 
ing and falling wedges because the breakout is not at the top or bottom 
of the pattern. 


Swing trader A trader who tries to profit by trading the move from peak 
to valley, or valley to peak. Usually holds positions for day(s) and weeks, but 
usually not for several months or years. 

Tall or short patterns A ratio expressed as a percentage of the formation 
height and breakout price. The median value separates the difference between 


Glossary 1209 


short (values below or equal to the median) and tall (values above the median) 
and appears in Table x.5. 

Term—short, intermediate, or long A short-term trend lasts up to 3 
months. Intermediate-term trends last between 3 and 6 months. Long-term 
trends last more than 6 months. 

Throwback A retrace after an upward breakout. Price declines to, or 
comes very close to, the breakout price or the pattern’s trendline within 30 
days after an upward breakout. Whitespace must appear between the hooking 
price action of the throwback and the breakout price. See Figure G2. 

Trend high Used for flags, pennants, and perhaps other chart patterns, 
the minor high that begins or ends a straight-line price run. Similar to the 
ultimate high except it marks the start or end of a very short-term price trend, 
not a 20% price change. 

Trend low Used for flags, pennants, and perhaps other chart patterns, 
the minor low that begins or ends a straight-line price run. Similar to the ulti- 
mate low except it marks the start or end of a very short-term price trend, not 
a 20% price change. 

Trend start The price were a trend begins leading to the start of a chart 
pattern. To find the trend start, begin at the start of a chart pattern and move 
backward in time. If price climbs leading away from the chart pattern, find the 
highest high before price closes 20% or more below and before the highest 
high. When this occurs, the highest high marks the trend start. If price drops 
leading away from the chart pattern (working backward in time), find the low- 
est low before price closes 20% or more above and before the lowest low. 
When that occurs, the lowest low marks the trend start. Price overshoots and 
undershoots within two weeks of the chart pattern start are ignored. 

Triple+ bust Price busts the chart pattern three or more times. See 
Busted pattern and Figure G1. 

Ultimate high The highest high before price declines by 20% or more, 
measured from the highest high to the close or a close below the chart pattern’s 
low. If the stock had not completed a 20% decline before end of data, then 
use the highest high to that point. The Introduction explains how to find the 
ultimate high. 

Ultimate low The lowest low before price rises by 20% or more, meas- 
ured from the lowest low to the close, or a close above the chart pattern’s high. 
If the stock had not completed a 20% rise before end of data, then use the low- 
est low to that point. The Introduction explains how to find the ultimate low. 

Undershoot Within 2 weeks before the start of a chart pattern, price 
plunges below the bottom of the chart pattern and quickly recovers. Figure G4 
shows an example of undershoot at B. Price drops from peak C and forms a 
descending triangle (A). Along the way down, price undershoots the start of 
the chart pattern at B, which could interfere with the determination of where 
the trend starts. 


1210 Glossary 


C Adobe Systems (ADBE) 3D Systems (DDD) 


ia 2 
t fh 


Wty oth 
HN fp»: iH. \, rm 


Jan 18 Feb Mar 


Figure G4_ Undershoot (B) and overshoot (F) appear near the start of two chart 
patterns. Undershoot and overshoot are not included in the determination of 
where the trend starts. 


Volatility stop A stop-loss order whose placement is determined by how 
volatile a stock is. Compute the high-low price range for each day for the most 
recent 22 days (the approximate number of trading days in a month). Take the 
average of those values and multiply by two. Subtract the result from the cur- 
rent /ow price to get the stop-loss value for a long-side trade. For short sales, 
add the result to the current high price to get the stop-loss value. 


Table G1 shows the calculation for 3M stock. The High column shows 
the high price for the day, and the Low column shows the low price for 
the day. The Difference column shows the difference between the two 
columns. At the bottom of the table, I averaged the Difference column 
and found it was 3.65. Multiply this by two (7.30) and subtract it from 
the low price (153.92) to get the volatility stop location for a bullish 
trade (146.62). For a short sale, add 7.30 to the most recent high price 
(159.32) to get the stop location of 166.53. 


Table G1 
Volatility Stop Calculation 
High Low Difference 
157.42 151.73 5.69 
159.62 150.49 9.13 
163.38 156.89 6.49 
160.87 158.97 1.90 
159.83 157.59 2.24 
162.09 156.47 5.62 
157.42 155.48 1.94 


158.67 156.24 2.43 


Glossary 1211 


Table G1 (Continued) 


High Low Difference 
156.73 151.71 5.02 
155.05 150.10 4.95 
154.78 151.53 3.25 
156.52 153.48 3.04 
156.71 154.05 2.66 
157.80 155.31 2.49 
158.88 156.46 2.42 
159.96 157.05 2.91 
157.10 154.69 2.41 
155.60 153.87 1.73 
154.72 151.04 3.68 
153.25 150.99 2.26 
156.93 154.16 2.77 
159.23 153.92 5.31 
Average: 3.65 
2x volatility: 7.30 
Stop-loss location: 146.62 


Volume trend The slope of a line found using linear regression on vol- 
ume data determines the volume trend. A rising volume trend means volume 
increases over time; a falling volume trend is one that recedes over time. 

Website Bulkowski’s website is at http://ThePatternSite.com. 

Wide pattern Measured from the date of the chart pattern’s start to its 
end, in calendar days. Patterns wider than the median width are wide ones; 
shorter than the median are narrow ones. 

Yearly position Where the breakout occurs in the yearly high-low price 
range. Io determine the yearly price range, start from the day before the break- 
out and find the highest high and lowest low over the prior 12 months. Divide 
the range into thirds and compare the current breakout price to one of those 
thirds to determine its position (highest third, middle third, or lowest third) in 
the yearly price range. 

Yearly position, performance The yearly position for each chart pat- 
tern’s breakout price is determined and its performance is placed in one of 
three bins (those within a third of the yearly high, middle, or low). Average the 
results in each bin. The result is the performance of chart patterns based on 
their yearly high-low position. 


Visual Index 
of Chart Patterns 


AD=CD, Bearish, page 27 ii se gow a 4 ae oo ee ee 


AB=CD, Bullish, page 36 2.6 6 6 be ee ew ee ee 
Bat. Beats, Page th as a e4:.4 ee ORR Oa ee 
Bat, Wullish pape 52%, ie a: dod & ke we @ 2 ads daw, 


Big Mi pace G0. oe ee ton ea aoe ee Sek ee A 


Bil WV PAGE Piet eae AE Oe RE RE 


Broadening Bottoms, page 95. .............4. 


1212 


Visual Index of Chart Patterns 1213 


Ascending, page 114... 2. 2 ee ee ee es 


| 
Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and oi th 
ae ae it It I, 
I 
| 


Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and l Ay 


| 
Descending paced 32 yo: a4 ee be 6 a a eS I 


Broadening Tops, page 153... 2... ee 


Broadening Wedges, Ascending, page 175 ........ 


nm LIM TT il! 
Broadening Wedges, Descending, page 192 ....... il oN 


ve tia "y 
Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms, page 208... .... wl We 
Miya 


iy 


Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops, page 227......... i iy! fl 
iT | | 


Bistrertly, Bearish, page 245 44d Gi bk. aa ew ao ad 


Butterthy, Bullish; page 255. «4.40% ¥ ou 6204 24 ok oS /A 


tILILIL | | 


Cloudbanks;iae6203...5 4454 404%55 be be os (Months) | } 
| 


1214 Visual Index of Chart Patterns 


Crab, Bearish; page 27) ese eo ee Ree Rw Re oR 


Crab, Bullish, page 286 20.6 hs eee eee eee 


} 
Cup-with-blandle, pare 294.32 arses Gey Ga Godoe b ie i! 
| My! 
i 
| 
4A 
Cup-with-Handle, Inverted, page 311 .........., i l Ny i 


Diamond Bottoms, page 326 ............0.. { 
Diamond ‘Tops; page 344 2. 2 2 ee be a ee eS 


Diving Board, page 362.05 «ea ee See bE RSS 


Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam, page 379... 2.2... mI 
II 
Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve, page 398. ........ | | hoa HII! 


Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam, page 419... 2.0... mM 


Visual Index of Chart Patterns 


Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve, page 438 


Double Tops, Adam & Adam, page 458... 2.2.2.2... 


Double Tops, Adam & Eve, page 476........... 


Double Tops, Eve & Adam, page 494. .......... 


Double ‘Tops, Eve & Eve; page 510. ow 2405 44 aoe 


Flags, page 526 


Flags, High and Tight, page 542 


Gaps, page 555 


Gartley, Bearish, page 568... ...........04. 


Gartley, Bullish, page 577. .............04. 


1215 


| i 
hack tall 
il 
E E 
he A 
hy 
Tia 
A E 
| lI, 
I) | 
i Mi i 
E A 
lh | 
[| 
i Mm i 
E E 
I | 
| 
tl I | 
ye lie 
| fl 
| 
Sn 


1216 


Visual Index of Chart Patterns 


Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, page 585 ......... 


Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex, page 601 .. . 


Head-and-Shoulders Tops, page 618... ........ 


Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex, page 636 


Horn Bottoms, page 653 


Horn Tops, page 668 . . 


Islands Reversals, page 682 ..... G G 


Measured Move Down, page 699... .......... 


Measured Move Up, page 713 


Pennants, page 726 


| 
My ou 
sos tl Sos 
H 
H 
RS 
II 
L | | 
| i! I! 7 
', 


LS 
I 
i , 


HoH 
: yey? 
ill I l 


jl 

yl 

. | WHIT | 
i I\! | 


Pipe Bottoms, page 743 . 


Pipe Tops, page 760 


Rectangles Bottoms, page 


Rectangles Tops, page 792 


Roof, page 811 


Roof, Inverted, page 825 


Rounding Bottoms, page 839 


Rounding Tops, page 855 


Scallops, Ascending, page 871 


Scallops, Ascending and Inverted, page 888 


Scallops, Descending, page 903 


Visual Index of Chart Patterns 1217 
| i 
I H, I 
Sics obra Sean ee bb) ge hep Paey ney SG coe ten fed- Ueto Gee. bas Ae a I 
| P 
P||P 
Bw 2 BRE, Abe Hon SY cod SER Ga aw ee ee PE ee ATS til! M1 
i | 
I 
Ih, 
Tao occas arnt 6s la Th 
‘yl h hy hl 


f aya, a 
| Vi 
| 


> 


1218 Visual Index of Chart Patterns 


Scallops, Descending and Inverted, page 921. ...... 


Dhree Falling Peaks, page 936 « ocies aay Ga Gohoe 4 


Three Peaks and Domed House, page 952. ....... 


Three Rising Valleys, page 960 .............. 


‘Iniangles, Ascending, page 976 « «<6 46% ow aw os 


‘Triangles, Descending, 


NAGE 97? oe oa ewe eee aS 


‘TImangles, Symimetrical, page LOUD sine o.a.% a6 Be aed 


Triple Bottoms, page 1 


‘Triple Tops, page 1057 


V-bottoms, page 1075 


040 22020 bk b¢ed ee a8 an 


om 
| 
\ | [ny 
‘h 
lly 
y 
| 
> 
i 
1 
|' 
|! 
iI ili | 
| lI el | 
Wyle Wl 
hy tal! 
1 OTB 1B 
TT) TT TT 
I] i'l m7 
My ey eh 
1! bat It Ih 


Visual Index of Chart Patterns 1219 


V-bottoms, extended, page 1089 ............. 


Vetops, pawe U0: 2. was on ie ee OS Rae ee /\ 


V-tops, extended, page 1118... 2... .....00.. 
Wedwes, Fallinps page 1131). ia 2b oo ad ats es emo Tia! iN aly! 


Wedves: Rising pace 11th «2.4 abod 24.5 Sake o 


Wolfe Wave, Bullish, page 1174... .......0.0. 


Wolfe Wave, Bearish, page 1164... .......0.. -~f 


Index 


3 Com Corp (COMS), 589, 711 

3D Systems (DDD), 17, 1210 

3M Company (MMM), 98, 264, 364, 1207 

30% retrace, purchase (rounding tops), 
867-868 


A 
AB/AX retrace, 54-55, 258, 289, 
579-580 
Abbott Laboratories (ABT), 30, 359, 858, 
908 
Abercrombie & Fitch Co. (ANF), 90-91, 
266 
Abitibi-Consolidated (ABY), ascending 
scallops, 875 
Accelerate Diagnostics Inc (AXDX), 
366, 1076 
Accenture plc (ACN), bearish butterfly, 
246, 252 
Acuity Brands, Inc. (AYD), bearish 
Gartley, 575 
Acuson Corp (ACN), 109, 557, 657 
Adam & Adam double bottoms 
(AADBs), 379-381 
average rise, 386 
bottom to bottom variation, 393-394 
breakouts, 379, 383-384, 387, 390, 393 
busted patterns, 391, 393 
companies, analysis, 394-396 
days to ultimate high, 387 
experience, 394-396 
failures, 384-386, 390 
figures, 380-393 
gaps, 388 
height, 388-389 


identification guidelines, 381-384 

industry check, 393 

lower bottom, 394 

low price, 382-383 

measure rule, targets, 391, 393 

non-busted performance, 391 

number found, 386 

performance over time, 390 

price trend, 381-382 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 386 

rise between bottoms, 382 

rising/falling volume, 390 

separation, 383 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 386 

statistics, 386-391 

stop location, 393 

throwbacks, 382, 388 

trades, 391-394, 397 

trend change, 387 

volume, 383, 389 

width, 389 

yearly position, performance, 388 

Adam & Adam double tops (AAD'Ts), 

458, 459, 461, 471 

5% failure, 464 

average decline, 465 

breakouts, 458, 463, 465, 466, 468, 470 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 469 

busted patterns, 468, 469, 469 

buy signal, appearance (failure), 472 

companies, analysis, 459-462, 464, 
472, 472-473, 474 

confirmation line, 460, 461 


1221 


1222 


Index 


Adam & Adam double tops (Continued) 

cumulative failure rates, 466 

days to ultimate low, 465 

experience, 472-473 

failures, 463-464, 468, 469 

gaps, 467 

head-and-shoulders top, 462 

height, 467 

identification guidelines, 460-463, 462 

industry check, 471 

lower top, 472 

measure rule, targets, 469-470 

non-busted performance, 469 

number found, 464 

performance over time, 468, 469 

prices, 461, 463 

pullbacks, 466-467 

reversal/continuation performance, 
465 

right top, price decline, 463 

rising/falling volume, 468 

sell trendlines, stock sale opportunity, 
474 

separation, 463 

size statistics, 467 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 465 

statistics, 464, 464-469 

stops, 468, 471 

top high price, 461 

top-to-top variation, 471 

trades, 469-475, 470 

trend change, 465 

twin peaks, narrow spikes 
(comparison), 459 

valley between tops, 461 

volume, 463, 467, 468 

width, 467 

yearly position, performance, 465 

Adam & Eve double bottoms (AEDBs), 

398-401, 399-401, 403-404, 
411-412, 413, 415 

average rise, 405 

bottom to bottom variation, 412-413 

breakouts, 398, 402-403, 403, 406, 
407, 408-409, 412 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 409 

busted patterns, 409-410, 410 

companies, analysis, 413-416 


cumulative failure rates, 406 

days to ultimate high, 405 

double bottom trading, dilemma, 411 

downward price trend, reversal 
pattern, 401 

experience, 413-416 

failures, 404, 409, 409 

gaps, 407 

height, 407, 408 

identification guidelines, 400-403, 402 

industry check, 412 

lower bottom, 413 

low price, 402 

measured move up chart pattern, 
corrective phase, 400 

measure rule, targets, 410-412 

non-busted performance, 410 

number found, 405 

one-day downward price spike, 399 

performance over time, 409, 409 

price trend, 401 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 405 

right bottom, price rise, 402 

rise between bottoms, 402 

rising/falling volume, 408 

separation, 402 

size statistics, 408 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 405 

statistics, 405, 405-410 

stops, 409, 412 

throwbacks, 407 

trades, 410-418, 411 

trend change, 405-406 

triple bottoms, 1054 

volume, 402, 408, 409 

width, 407-408 

yearly position, performance, 406-407 


Adam & Eve double tops, 476-478, 


490-491 491 

average decline, 483 

breakouts, 476, 479-482, 485, 485, 
487, 489 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 487 

busted patterns/trades, 485, 487, 488, 
488, 490 

companies, analysis, 477, 479-482, 492 

confirmation, 482, 492 


cumulative failure rates, 484 
days to ultimate low, 484 
failures, 482-484, 487, 487 
gaps, 485 
height, 486, 492 
identification guidelines, #78, 478-481 
industry check, 489-490 
knots, 490 
lower top, 491 
measure rule, 488-489, 492 
move up pattern, formation, 480 
non-busted performance, 488 
number found, 483 
pattern, formation, 479 
peak width, difference, 481 
performance over time, 487, 487 
prices, 478, 481, 482 
pullbacks, 485 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 483 
right top, price decline, 479 
rising/falling volume, 487 
size statistics, 486 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 484 
statistics, 483-488, 484 
stops, 487, 490 
top high price, 478, 482 
top separation, 478-479, 482 
top-to-top variation, 491 
trades, 488-493, 489 
trend change, 484-485 
twin peaks, 477 
valleys, 478, 482 
volume, 479, 482, 486, 486 
width, 486 
yearly position, performance, 485 
AD/AX retrace, 55, 258, 289, 580 
ADC Telecommunications (ADCT), 
three falling peaks, 95 
Administaff Inc (ASF), 741, 962 
Adobe Systems (ADBE), 729, 1210 
Advanced Energy (AEIS), inverted roof, 
826 
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), 28, 
170-171, 221, 295, 324, 527, 559, 
669, 762 
Adverse breakout, sale, 740 
AES Corp (AES), 5 
AFLAC Inc (AFL), roof, 813 


1223 


Index 


Airborne Freight (ABF), 312, 591, 763 

Air Express Intl. Corp. (AEIC), ascend- 
ing broadening wedge, 176 

Airgas, Inc. (ARG), 939, 9632 

Air Product and Chemicals Inc. (APD), 
385, 703 

Alaska Air Group Inc. (ALK), 195, 347, 
422, 434-435, 597, 815, 837 

Albemarle (ALB), triple bottoms, 
1052-1053 

Albertsons Inc. (ABS), five-point reversal/ 
orthodox broadening top, 159 

Alcan Aluminum (AL), complex head- 
and-shoulders tops, 637 

Alcoa (AA), 15, 1175 

Alco Standard Corp (ASN), 564, 853 

Alex Brown Inc (AB), pipe tops, 764 

Alkermes (ALKS), 81, 99 

Allegheny Ludlum Corp (ALS), 
714, 771 

Allen Telecom Inc (ALN), head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, 587 

Alliance Data Systems Corp (ADS), 
bearish crab, 278 

Allstate Corp (ALL), 262, 828 

Alpharma (ALO), rounding tops, 857 

Alza (AZA), pennants, 731 

Amazon.com (AMZN), descending 
scallops, 908 

Amdahl Corp (AMH), high and tight 
flags, 544 

Amedisys Inc (AMED), 275, 1105 

Ameren (AEE), 823, 829 

American Eagle Outfitters Inc (AEO), 
V-bottoms, 1078 

American Electric Power AEP (AEP), 
bullish butterfly, 259 

American Electric Power (AEP), ascend- 
ing triangles, 992 

American Equity Investment Life 
Holding (AEL), 14, 1120 

American Equity Life (AEL), cloudbank, 
273-274 

American Express (AXP), bearish 
AB=CD pattern (usage), 35 

American Financial Group (AFG), swing 
trading throwbacks, 20 

American International Group (AIG), 
cloudbanks, 268 


1224 Index 


American Power Conversion Corp. 
(APCC), rectangle tops, 808-809 
American Woodmark Corp (AMWD), 
Adam & Eve double tops, 482 
AMN Healthcare (AMN), extended 
V-bottoms, 1092 
Analog Devices Inc (ADD), flags, 531 
Andrew Corp. (ANDW), ascending 
triangles, 992 
Andrew Corporation (ANDW), three 
falling peaks, 941 
Ann Taylor (ANN), 91-92, 383, 685, 744 
Aon Corp (AON), 31, 578 
Apache Corp. (APA), 55, 250, 280 
Apex distance, 985, 1008, 1029, 1139, 
1155 
Apex turning, triangles, 991, 1014, 1035 
Applebees (APPB), horizontal trendline/ 
down-sloping trendline, 133 
Apple Computer Inc. (AAPL), bottom 
bump-and-run reversal, 213 
Apple Inc. (AAPL), 51, 59 
Applied Materials (AMAT), Eve & Eve 
double bottoms, 443 
Applied Power (APW), measured move 
up, 716 
ArcBest Corp (ARCB), bullish Gartley, 
581 
Arco Chemical Co. (RCM), 160, 630, 
1144 
Area gaps, 357, 557-561, 560 
Arithmetic scale, 211, 230 
Arrow Electronics (ARW), 287, 375, 586, 
991 
ASA Holdings (ASAI), head-and-shoul- 
ders bottoms, 590 
ASA Ltd (ASA), 158, 1136 
Ascending and inverted scallops, 
888-890 
average rise, 894 
bearish trend, 893 
breakouts, 888, 891, 896, 896, 898 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 898 
busted patterns, 899, 899 
companies, analysis, 889, 891-893, 901 
confirmation, 891, 893, 900 
cumulative failure rates, 895 
daily chart, 890 


days to ultimate high, 895 

failures, 892, 894, 898, 898 

gaps, 896 

height, 897 

identification guidelines, 890, 890-891 

long-term uptrend, price retrace, 889 

measure rule, targets, 899-900 

non-busted performance, 899 

number found, 894 

overhead resistance, presence, 893 

performance over time, 898, 898 

retrace, 890-891 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 894 

reversal/continuation performance, 
894 

rising/falling volume, 898 

roundness (shape), 891 

series height/width, 901 

shortness/narrowness, 892 

size statistics, 897 

smooth top, 890 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 
894-895 

statistics, 894, 894-899 

stops, 898, 901 

support/resistance, search, 900 

throwbacks, 896 

trades, 899-902, 900 

trend change, 895 

trendline, piercing, 901 

volume, 897, 898 

width, 897 

yearly position, performance, 896 

Ascending broadening wedge, 175-178, 

180, 185, 185 

average decline/rise, 183 

breakouts, 175, 177, 181, 183, 184, 185 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 186 

busted patterns/trades, 186, 186-188 

companies, analysis, 176, 177, 179, 
181, 189, 191 

cumulative failure rates, 183 

days to ultimate high, 183 

days to ultimate low, 183 

experience, 189-190 

failures, 181-182, 186, 186 

gain, 189 


gaps, 184 

height, 184 

identification guidelines, 179, 179-181 

internal partial rise, occurrence 
(rarity), 179 

measure rule, 187-188, 191 

non-busted performance, 187 

number found, 182 

partial decline/rise, 188 

performance over time, 186, 186 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 182 

reversal/continuation performance, 
182 

rising/falling volume, 185 

shape, complex head-and-shoulders 
tops, 642 

size statistics, 185 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 182 

statistics, 182, 182-187 

throwbacks, 183-184 

touches, 180 

trades, 187, 187-188, 190-191 

trend change, 183 

trendlines, 180 

up-sloping trendlines, 176 

whitespace, 180 

width, 184 

Ascending scallops, 871-873 

average decline/rise, 877 

breakouts, 871-872, 874, 875, 878, 
878, 880-881 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 881 

busted patterns, 881, 882, 882 

buy point, 884 

companies, analysis, 873, 875, 885, 887 

cumulative failure rates, 877 

days to ultimate high, 877 

days to ultimate low, 877 

even ends, 884 

experience, 884-886 

failures, 874-876, 875, 881, 881 

gaps, 879 

handle, 884 

height, 879-880 

identification guidelines, 873-874, 874 

letter J, resemblance, 873 

measure rule, targets, 882-884 


1225 


Index 


non-busted performance, 882 

number found, 876 

performance over time, 881, 881 

price, 873, 875 

pullbacks, 879 

retrace, usage, 886 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 876 

reversal/continuation performance, 
876 

right rim, height, 887 

rising/falling volume, 880 

series, formation, 884 

size statistics, 879 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 877 

statistics, 876, 876-882 

stops, 881, 884 

throwbacks, 879 

trades, 882-884, 883, 885, 886-887 

trend change, 877-878 

volume, 874, 880, 887 

V-shaped bowl, 887 

width, 874, 880 

yearly position, performance, 878 


Ascending triangles, 976-979 


apex distance, 985 

apex turning, 991 

average decline/rise, 983 

breakouts, 976, 980, 984, 985, 985, 987 

bullish triangle, boundaries, 977 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 988 

busted patterns/trades, 987, 988, 988, 
991 

companies, analysis, 977, 980-982, 
990, 991, 992-994, 995 

construction, correctness, 982 

crossing pattern, 979, 981 

cumulative failure rates, 984 

days to ultimate high, 984 

days to ultimate low, 984 

down-sloping volume trend, 995 

downward spikes, 980 

downward volume trend, 982 

experience, 992-994 

failures, 982-983, 987, 988 

gaps, 985 

head-and-shoulders bottom, 980, 981 

height, 985, 986 


1226 Index 


Ascending triangles (Continued) 

horizontal neckline, 980 

horizontal top, 977 

identification guidelines/problems, 
978-980, 979, 980 

institutional investors, impact, 978 

measure rule, targets, 988-990 

non-busted performance, 988 

number found, 983 

performance over time, 987, 988 

premature breakout, 977, 980 

prices, 990, 991 

pullbacks, 985 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 983 

reversal/continuation performance, 983 

rising/falling volume, 987 

size statistics, 986 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 984 

statistics, 983, 983-988 

stops, 987, 991 

support lines, triangle borders 
(relationship), 995 

support/resistance, 990-99 1 

throwbacks, 985 

trades, 988-991, 989, 994-996 

trend change, 984 

trendlines, 979, 991 

up-sloping support line, 991 

up-sloping trendline, 977, 990 

upward breakouts, 976, 982 

visual approach, 989 

volume, 980, 986, 986 

weekly time scale, 991 

width, 986 

yearly position, performance, 984-985 


Adam & Eve double tops, 483 

ascending broadening wedge, 182 

ascending scallops, 877 

ascending triangles, 983 

bearish butterfly, 251 

bearish Wolfe wave, 1170 

big M, 65 

broadening bottoms/tops, 101, 161 

complex head-and-shoulders tops, 643 

descending broadening wedge, 198 

descending inverted scallops, 926 

descending scallops, 910 

descending triangles, 1005 

diamond bottoms/tops, 333, 350 

Eve & Adam double tops, 499 

Eve & Eve double tops, 516 

extended V-tops, 1123-1124 

falling wedges, 1137 

flags, 533 

head-and-shoulders tops, 624-625 

horn tops, 673 

inverted cup with handle, 317 

inverted roof, 830 

island reversals, 688-689 

pennants, 733 

pipe tops, 765 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 779, 798 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 121 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 140 

rising wedges, 1154 

roof, 816 

rounding tops, 862 

symmetrical triangles, 1027 

three falling peaks, 943 


Assurant Inc (AIZ), 100, 189, 709, 
709-710 

Assured Guaranty Ltd. (AGO), bullish 
butterfly, 256 


top bump-and-run reversal, 234 
triple tops, 1064 
V-tops, 1109 
Average gap size, 561-563, 1199 
Atlantic Richfield Co. (ARC), 348, 747 Average length, 706, 718-719 
Autodesk Inc (ADSK), falling wedges, Average rise, 1198, 1201 
1147 Adam & Adam double bottoms, 386 
Automatic Data Processing Inc (ADP), Adam & Eve double bottoms, 405 
bearish crab, 284 ascending broadening wedge, 182 
Average, 1201 ascending inverted scallops, 894 
Average decline, 33, 49, 283, 574, 1198, ascending scallops, 877 
1201 ascending triangles, 983 
Adam & Adam double tops, 465 big W, 82 


bottom bump-and-run reversal, 214 
broadening bottoms/tops, 101, 161 
bullish Wolfe wave, 1179 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms, 
607 
cup with handle, 300 
descending broadening wedge, 198 
descending inverted scallops, 926 
descending scallops, 910 
descending triangles, 1005 
diamond bottoms/tops, 333, 350 
diving board, 368 
Eve & Eve double bottoms, 446 
extended V-bottoms, 1094 
falling wedges, 1137 
flags, 533 
head-and-shoulders bottoms, 592 
high and tight flags, 547 
horn bottoms, 658 
inverted roof, 830 
island reversals, 688-689 
pennants, 733 
pipe bottoms, 749 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 779, 798 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 121 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 140 
rising wedges, 1154 
roof, 816 
rounding bottoms/tops, 844, 862 
symmetrical triangles, 1027 
three rising valleys, 965 
triple bottoms, 1046 
V-bottoms, 1080 
Average rise after D, 40-41, 57, 260, 291, 
582 
Average rise/decline for patterns without 
throwbacks/pullbacks, 1199 
Average rise/decline for patterns with 
throwbacks/pullbacks, 1199 
Average success rate, 706, 719 
Average time to close the gap, 560-563 
Average time to throwback/pullback 
ends, 1199 
Average time to throwback/pullback 
peaks, 1199 
Avery Dennison Corp (AVY), 1090, 1149 
Avon Products (AVP), 64, 1000 


Index 1227 


B 
Baker Hughes (BHI), 345, 981 
Baker J. Inc. JBAK), right-angled ascend- 
ing broadening formation, 116 
Balchem Corp. (BCPC), ascending 
triangles, 994 
Banc One Corp. (ONE), 96, 411 
Bandag Inc. (BDG), horn tops, 672 
BankAmerica Corp (BAC), pipe bottoms, 
758 
Barrick Gold (ABX), ascending broaden- 
ing wedge, 177 
BA/XA retrace, 47, 248, 279-280, 571-572 
BC/AB retrace, 30, 280 
BC/BA retrace, 47, 248, 572 
Beacon Roofing Supply Inc. (BECN), 
big W (price increase), 78 
Bearish AB=CD, 27-29 
breakeven failure rate, 33 
companies, analysis, 28, 30, 31, 35 
failure, focus, 31-32 
identification guidelines, 29-31 
number found, 32 
pattern, 28, 33 
shape, 29-30 
statistics, 32, 32-33 
tour, 28-29 
trades, 33-35 
upward breakout, 30 
usage, 35 
Bearish bat, 44-46 
average decline after D, 49 
BA/XA retrace, 47 
BC/BA retrace, 47 
breakeven failure rate, 49 
companies, analysis, 45, 46, 48, 51 
DA/XA retrace, 47 
DC/BC extension, 47 
downward moves, 44 
duration, 47 
failure, focus, 48-49 
identification guidelines, 46, 46-47 
number found, 49 
pattern end, price move, 50 
price decline, upward breakout, 46 
price turn, 50 
statistics, 48, 49 
trades, 49-51 
volume, 47, 49 


1228 


Index 


Bearish butterfly, 245-248 

average decline, 251 

BA/XA retrace, 248 

BC/BA retrace, 248 

breakeven failure rate, 251 

companies, analysis, 246, 248, 250, 252 

DA/XA extension, 249 

DC/BC extension, 248 

downward moves, 245 

duration, 249 

failures, focus, 249-251 

identification guidelines, 247, 247-249 

number found, 251 

pattern end, price move, 252 

price, 248, 250, 251 

statistics, 249, 251 

trades, 251-254, 252 

upward trend, 246 

volume, 249 

volume trend, performance, 251 
Bearish crab, 277-279 

average decline after D, 283 

BA/XA retrace, 279-280 

BC/BA retrace, 280 

breakeven failure rate, 282 

companies, analysis, 278, 280, 281, 284 

DA/XA retrace, 281 

DC/BC extension, 281 

downward moves, 277 

duration, 281 

failures, focus, 281-282 

identification guidelines, 279-281, 280 

number found, 282 

pattern end, price move, 283 

pennant, usage, 284 

price, 278, 281, 283 

statistics, 282, 282-283 

trades, 283-285 

volume trend, performance, 283 
Bearish Gartley, 568-571 

average decline after D, 574 

BA/XA retrace, 571-572 

BC/BA retrace, 572 

breakeven failure rate, 574 

chart pattern trade, 575 

companies, analysis, 569, 571, 373, 575 

DA/XA retrace, 572 

DC/BC extension, 572 

downward moves, 568 


duration, 572 

failures, focus, 572-573 
identification guidelines, 570, 570-572 
minor dip, display, 571 
number found, 574 

pattern end, price move, 574 
price, 569, 575 

shorting difficulty, 573 
statistics, 572, 574 

trade, 574-576 

ugly patterns, 571 

volume, 572, 574 


Bearish pattern, ascending inverted 


scallops, 893 


Bearish Wolfe wave, 1164-1166 


apex, 1168 

average decline, 1170 

breakeven failure rate, 1170 

bull markets, performance/markets 
over time, 1171 

companies, analysis, 1165, 1167, 1173 

downward breakouts, 1164 

Estimated Time of Arrival (ETA) line, 
1166, 1168, 1172 

Estimate Price at Arrival (EPA) line, 
1166, 1168, 1172 

failures, focus, 1168-1169, 1171 

identification guidelines, 1166-1168, 
1167 

Interactive Brokers Group Inc (IBKR), 
1169 

number found, 1170 

performance, 1171 

performance over time, 1171 

prices, 1165, 1167, 1169 

statistics, 1170, 1170-1172 

swing trade, profit, 1173 

time to reach, 1170 

trades, 1172, 1172, 1173 

trend change, 1171 

volume, 1171, 1171 


Bear market, 264, 266, 267, 268, 270, 


681, 1202 


Beazer Homes USA (BZH), ascending 


triangles, 992 


Beazer Homes USA, Inc (BZH), meas- 


ured move down, 704 


Bed Bath and Beyond (BBBY), 506, 


506-507, 901 


Ben and Jerrys A (BJICA), falling 
wedges, 1145 
Beneficial Corp. (BNL), triple top 
(broadening formation), 155 
Best Buy Co (BBY), rounding bottoms, 
842 
Bethlehem Steel Corp. (BS), bottom 
bump-and-run reversal (bottom 
BARR), 212 
Big Lots (BIG), complex head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, 614, 614-615 
Big M, 60-62, 74 
average decline, 65 
breakouts, 63, 66, 67, 68-69 
busted patterns/trades, 70, 70, 
73-74 
companies, analysis, 61, 63, 64, 72 
cumulative failure rates, 66 
days to ultimate low, 65 
downward breakouts, 60 
duration, 63 
failures, 64-65, 69, 69 
gaps, 67 
head-and-shoulders bottom, 63 
height, 67, 68 
identification guidelines, 62, 
62-63 
launch price, return, 72 
measure rule, targets, 71-72 
non-busted performance, 70 
number found, 65 
performance over time, 69, 69 
post-breakout statistics, 67 
prices, 61, 63 
pullback, 66-67, 73 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 65 
rising/falling volume, 68 
short, 72 
size statistics, 68 
speed trap, 65 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 65 
statistics, 65, 65-70 
stop, 69, 72 
trade, 71, 71-76 
trend change, 65-66 
volume, 63, 67-68, 68 
width, 67-68 
yearly position, performance, 66 


Index 1229 


Big W, 77-78, 89 
average rise, 82 
bottom volume, increase, 89 
breakouts, 77, 80, 81, 83, 84, 86 
bull markets, performance/failures, 86 
busted patterns, 87, 87 
chart pattern, reversal portion 
(triple bottoms), 1041 
companies, analysis, 78, 79, 81, 
90-93, 93 
cumulative failure rates, 83 
days to ultimate high, 82 
duration, 80 
experience, 90-93 
failures, 80-81, 86, 87 
gaps, 84 
height, 84, 85 
identification guidelines, 79, 79-80 
launch price/time, 79, 88-90 
measure rule, targets, 88 
non-busted performance, 87 
number found, 81 
overhead resistance, 93 
performance over time, 86, 87 
price increase/trend, 78, 80 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 82 
rising/falling volume, 85-86 
size statistics, 85 
statistics, 81-87, 82 
stops, 86, 88 
throwbacks, 84 
trades, 88, 88-90, 93-94 
trend change, 82 
valley performance, reduction, 89 
valleys, increase, 90 
volume, 80, 85, 85 
width, 85 
yearly position, performance, 84 
Biogen Idec (BIIB), Eve & Adam double 
bottoms, 421 
BJ Services (BJS), descending broaden- 
ing formation (absence), 137 
Board, 11, 362, 374, 1202 
Boatmens Bancshares (BOAT), falling 
wedges, 1134 
Boeing Company (BA), diving board, 11 
Bollinger band indicators, 506 
Bombay Co, Inc (BBA), triple tops, 1061 


1230 


Index 


Bottom bump-and-run reversal (bottom 

BARR), 208-210 

arithmetic scale, 211 

average rise, 214 

breakouts, 208, 212, 215, 216, 218 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 219 

bump-and-run reversal bottom failure, 
223 

bump-and-run reversal bottom, 
weekly scale, 225 

bump height, lead-in height (contrast), 
213 

bump phase, 212 

busted patterns, 219, 219 

companies, analysis, 209, 212, 213, 
17, 221, 292993, 925 

confirmation, wait, 220 

cumulative failure rates, 216 

days to ultimate high, 214 

down-sloping trop trendline, lead-in 
height, 211 

dual bumps, 212, 214, 216-217 

experience, 221-223 

failures, 213,218, 219 

gaps, 216 

height, 217 

high sale, 220-221 

identification guidelines, 210-212, 211 

lead-in phase, price movement, 212 

measure rule, 219-220 

non-busted performance, 219 

number found, 214 

performance over time, 218, 219 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 214 

reversal/continuation performance, 
214 

rise, cessation, 22] 

rising/falling volume, 217-218 

size statistics, 218 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 214 

statistics, 214, 214-219 

stock purchase, considerations, 217 

throwbacks, 215-216 

trades, 219-221, 220, 222, 223-226 

trend change, 214-215 

uphill run, volume, 212 

upward momentum, 209 


volume, 217, 218 
width, 217 
yearly position, performance, 215 
Bottom fishing, 9-12, 10 
Bottom separation, 383, 402, 423, 442 
Bottom to bottom variation, 393-394, 
412-413, 433, 453 
Bottom trendline, falling wedges 
(relationship), 1147 
Bottom volume, increase (big W), 89 
Bounce trading, diving board, 373, 
373-374 
Breakaway gap, 557-558, 561, 561-562, 
721, 809 
Breakeven failure rate, 7, 1197, 1202 
5% failure rate, 1202 
bearish AB=CD, 33 
bearish bat, 49 
bearish butterfly, 251 
bearish crab, 282 
bearish Gartley, 574 
bearish Wolfe wave, 1170 
bullish AB=CD, 40 
bullish bat, 57 
bullish butterfly, 260 
bullish crab, 291 
bullish Gartley, 582 
bullish Wolfe wave, 1179-1180 
Breakout, 1202 
descending scallops, 916 
extended V-bottoms/tops, 1092-1093, 
1121-1122 
gap, 1202 
heavy/light breakout volume perfor- 
mance, 1200 
median breakout distance to apex, 
1199 
premature breakout, 1207 
purchase, falling wedges, 1144 
Breakout day gap, 23, 23, 67, 1202 
Breakout day volume 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
390, 468 
Adam & Eve double tops, 487 
ascending broadening wedge, 185 
ascending inverted scallops, 898 
ascending scallops, 880 
ascending triangles, 987 
big M, 68-69 


big W, 86 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 218 

broadening bottoms/tops, 105-106, 
165 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 610, 646 

descending inverted scallops, 930 

descending triangles, 1010 

diamond bottoms/tops, 336, 354 

diving board, 370-371 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
430, 502 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 449, 
519-520 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1098, 
1127-1128 

falling wedges, 1141 

flags, 534, 536 

head-and-shoulders bottoms, 595 

high and tight flags, 549 

horn bottoms/tops, 660, 675-676 

inverted cup with handle, 320-321 

inverted roof, 833-834 

island reversals, 692-693 

pennants, 735-736 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 783-784, 802 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 125 

rising wedges, 1158 

roof, 819 

rounding tops, 865 

symmetrical triangles, 1031 

three falling peaks, 945-946 

three rising valleys, 968 

top bump-and-run reversal, 238 

triple bottoms, 1049-1050 

V-bottoms/tops, 1083, 1114 

Breakout direction, 1199 

Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
387, 463, 465 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
402-403, 406, 479-482, 485 

ascending broadening wedge, 181, 183 

ascending inverted scallops, 891, 896 

ascending scallops, 874, 878 

ascending triangles, 980, 984 

big M, 66 

big W, 84 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 215 


Index 1231 


broadening bottoms/tops, 98-100, 
103, 157-158, 161 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 605-606, 608, 641, 644 

confirmation, 63, 80, 212, 232, 
383-384 

cup with handle, 297, 300 

descending broadening wedge, 196, 
199 

descending inverted scallops, 925, 927 

descending scallops, 906, 911 

descending triangles, 1002, 1007 

diamond bottoms/tops, 329-331, 334, 
349-351 

diving board, 366 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
424, 427, 497, 500 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 442, 
447, 514-515, 517 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1096, 1125 

falling wedges, 1135, 1139 

flags, 530, 533 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
590, 593, 623-626 

high and tight flags, 545, 547 

horn bottoms/tops, 656, 659, 671, 
674 

inverted cup with handle, 314, 318 

inverted roof, 828, 831 

island reversals, 686, 690 

pennants, 730, 733 

pipe bottoms/tops, 747, 750, 762, 766 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 777, 780, 796, 
799 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 119, 122 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 137, 142 

rising wedges, 1152, 1155 

roof, 814, 816 

rounding bottoms/tops, 843, 845-846, 
859, 863 

symmetrical triangles, 1023, 1029 

three falling peaks, 939-940, 944 

three rising valleys, 964, 966 

top bump-and-run reversal, 235 

triple bottoms, 1044, 1046 

V-bottoms, 1078, 1081 


Breakout performance, 119, 627 


1232 Index 


Breakout point, price move (absence), 
1136 
Breakout price, 119, 597, 616, 1038, 
1202 
Breakout statistics, 1199 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
388, 466 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
407, 485 
ascending broadening wedge, 184 
ascending inverted scallops, 896 
ascending scallops, 878 
ascending triangles, 985 
big M, 67 
big W, 83 
bottom bump-and-run reversal 
(bottom BARR), 216 
broadening bottoms/tops, 103, 163 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 609, 645 
cup with handle, 301 
descending broadening wedge, 199 
descending inverted scallops, 928 
descending scallops, 9/1 
descending triangles, 1007 
diamond bottoms/tops, 335, 352 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
428, 500 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 447, 
517 
extended V-bottoms/tops, 1096, 1125 
falling wedges, 1139 
flags, 534 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
593, 626 
high and tight flags, 548 
horn bottoms/tops, 659, 674 
inverted cup with handle, 319 
inverted roof, 832 
island reversals, 690 
pennants, 733 
pipe bottoms/tops, 750, 766 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 781, 800 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 123 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 141 
rising wedges, 1156 
roof, 817 


rounding bottoms/tops, 846, 864 
three falling peaks, 944 
three rising valleys, 967 
top bump-and-run reversal, 236 
triple bottoms, 1047 
triple tops, 1065 
V-bottoms/tops, 1081, 1111 
Breakout volume, 143-144, 303, 
408-409, 751-752, 767, 1202 
Breakout, wait 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
393,470 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
412, 489 
ascending triangles, 990 
descending inverted scallops, 933 
descending triangles, 1013-1014 
diamond bottoms/tops, 339, 356 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
433, 504-505 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 452, 
522 
pennants, 737 
rectangle bottoms, 787 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 146 
rising wedges, 1161 
rounding bottoms, 850 
symmetrical triangles, 1035 
Brinker International (EAT), 640, 982 
Broadening bottoms, 95-98 
alternating touches, 109 
average decline/rise, 101 
breakouts, 98-100, 103, 103, 105-106 
busted patterns/trades, 106, 107, 107, 
110 
companies, analysis, 96, 99, 109, 
110-112 
cumulative failure rates, 102 
days to ultimate high, 102 
days to ultimate low, 102 
downward breakouts, 95, 100 
experience, 110-112 
failures, 100-101, 106, 106 
five-point reversal, 96 
gaps, 104 
height, 104-105 
height/width combinations, 105 
identification guidelines, 97, 97-100 


long stop, 109 

measure rule, 107-108 

move stop, 109 

non-busted performance, 107 

number found, 101 

partial rises/declines, 109-110 

performance over time, 106, 106 

post-breakout statistics, 103 

price trend, 98 

pullbacks, 103-104 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 101 

rising/falling volume, 105 

short stop, 109 

size statistics, 104 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 102 

statistics, 101, 101-107 

stops, 106, 110 

throwbacks, 103-104 

touches, 98 

trades, 107-110, 108, 112-113 

trend change, 102 

trendlines, 98 

upward breakouts, 95 

volume, 98, 105, 105 

whitespace, 98, 99 

width, 105 

yearly position, performance, 103 

Broadening tops, 153-156 

average decline/rise, 161 

breakouts, 153, 157-158, 160, 161, 
163, 165 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 166 

busted patterns/trades, 166-167, 167, 
170 

companies, analysis, 155, 158-160, 
169, 170-173 

cumulative failure rates, 162 

days to ultimate high, 161 

days to ultimate low, 161 

downward breakouts, 154 

experience, 170-173 

failures, 159, 166, 166 

five-point reversal/orthodox broaden- 
ing top, 159 

gaps, 162 

height, 163-164 

identification guidelines, 156-158, 157 


Index 1233 


long stop, 169 
measure rule, 167-169 
non-busted performance, 166-167 
number found, 160 
partial decline/rise, 170 
performance over time, 166, 166 
post-breakout statistics, 163 
price swing/trend, 156, 158 
price trend, 156 
pullbacks, 162 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 161 
rising/falling volume, 165 
size statistics, 164 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 161 
statistics, 160, 160-167 
stops, 166, 170 
target price computation (measure 
rule usage), 169 
throwbacks, 162 
touches, 157 
trades, 167-170, 168, 173-174 
trend change, 161 
trendlines, 156-157 
triple top, broadening formation, 155 
volume, 157, 165, 165 
width, 164 
yearly position, performance, 162 
Brooks Automation (BRKS), head-and- 
shoulders tops, 633, 634 
Building Materials Holding Corp. 
(BLG), descending triangles, 1016 
Buillish Gartley, 577 
Bullish AB=CD, 36-38 
average rise after D, 40-41 
breakeven failure rate, 40 
companies, analysis, 37-39, 42 
failures, focus, 39-40 
identification guidelines, 38, 38-39 
number found, 40 
pattern, 37, 38, 41 
price, 39, 41 
statistics, 40, 40-41 
trades, 41-43 
volume trend, performance, 41 
Bullish bat, 52-54 
AB/AX retrace, 54-55 
AD/AX retrace, 55 
average rise after D, 57 


1234 


Index 


Bullish bat (Continued) 

breakeven failure rate, 57 

CB/AB retrace, 55 

CD/CB extension, 55 

companies, analysis, 53, 55, 56, 59 

downward breakout, 56 

duration, 56 

failure, focus, 56 

identification guidelines, 54, 54-56 

increase, downward breakout, 55 

number found, 57 

pattern end, price move, 58 

price turn, frequency, 58 

statistics, 57, 57 

trades, 57-59 

upward breakout, 53 

upward moves, 52 

volume, 56 

volume trend, performance, 57 
Bullish butterfly, 255-256, 258 

AB/AX retrace, 258 

AD/AX retrace, 258 

average rise after D, 260 

breakeven failure rate, 260 

CD/CB extension, 258 

companies, analysis, 256, 257, 259, 262 

downward breakout, 257 

duration, 258 

failures, focus, 258-260 

identification guidelines, 257, 257-258 

number found, 260 

pattern end, price move, 261 

price, 259, 261 

profit, 262 

recovery, 256 

statistics, 260, 260-261 

trades, 261-262 

upward moves, 255 

volume, 258 

volume trend, performance, 260-261 
Bullish crab, 286-288 

AB/AX retrace, 289 

AD/AX retrace, 289 

average rise after D, 291 

breakeven failure rate, 291 

CB/AB retrace, 289 

CD/CB extension, 289 

companies, analysis, 287, 289, 290, 292 

downward breakout, 290 


duration, 289 

extended V-bottom, formation, 287 
failures, focus, 290 

identification guidelines, 288, 288-289 
number found, 290 

pattern end, price move, 292 

price turn, frequency, 291 

statistics, 290-291, 291 

stock short, 292 

trades, 291-293 

upward breakout, 289 

upward moves, 286 

volume, 289 

volume trend, performance, 291 


Bullish Gartley, 577-579, 578 


AB/AX retrace, 579-580 

AD/AX retrace, 580 

average rise after D, 582 

breakeven failure rate, 582 

CB/AB retrace, 580 

CD/CB extension, 580 

companies, analysis, 78, 580, 381, 584 
completion, 584 

downward breakout, 581 

duration, 581 

failures, focus, 581-582 

identification guidelines, 579, 579-581 
number found, 582 

pattern end, price move, 583 

price rise/turn, 581, 583 

statistics, 381, 582 

trades, 582-584 

trend direction, struggle, 580 

upward moves, 577 

volume, 580, 582 


Bullish triangle, boundaries (ascending 


triangles), 977 


Bullish Wolfe wave, 1174-1176 


apex, 1177 

average rise, 1179 

breakeven failure rate, 1179-1180 

bull markets performance/failures over 
time, 1181 

companies, analysis, 1175, 1177, 1178, 
1182 

Estimated Time of Arrival (ETA) line, 
1177, 1181-1182 

Estimate Price at Arrival (EPA) line, 
1177, 1181-1182 


failures, 1178-1179, 1181 

identification guidelines, 1176, 
1176-1177 

number found, 1179 

performance, 1180, 1181 

price, 1175, 1177, 1178 

profit, 1182 

statistics, 1179, 1179-1181 

time to reach, 1180 

trades, 1181, 1182-1183 

trend change, 1180 

upward breakouts, 1174 

volume, 1180, 1180 

Bull markets, 28, 49, 106, 286-287, 1202 
performance over time, 106, 536, 736 
success over time, 706, 720 
Bull markets, performance/failures over 

time, 1201 

Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
390, 469 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
409, 487 

ascending broadening wedge, 186, 186 

ascending inverted scallops, 898 

ascending triangles, 988 

bearish Wolfe wave, 1171 

big W, 86 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 219 

broadening tops, 166 

bullish Wolfe wave, 1181 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 611, 647 

cup with handle, 304 

descending broadening wedge, 202 

descending inverted scallops, 931 

descending scallops, 914 

descending triangles, 1011 

diamond bottoms/tops, 337, 355 

diving board, 371, 371 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
430, 503 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 450, 
520 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1098, 1128 

falling wedges, 1141 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
595, 628 

high and tight flags, 551 

horn bottoms/tops, 661, 676 


1235 


Index 


inverted cup with handle, 321 

inverted roof, 834 

island reversals, 693 

pipe bottoms/tops, 752, 768 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 784, 803 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 144 

rising wedges, 1158 

roof, 820 

rounding bottoms/tops, 848, 858 

symmetrical triangles, 1032 

three falling peaks, 946 

three rising valleys, 969 

top bump-and-run reversal, 239 

triple bottoms/tops, 1050, 1068 

V-bottoms/tops, 1083, 1114 


Bump-and-run reversal (BARR), 295, 


717 


Burlington Resources Inc. (BR), Eve & 


Adam double bottoms, 424 


Busted occurrence 


Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
391, 469 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
410, 488 

ascending broadening wedge, 186-187 

ascending inverted scallops, 899 

ascending scallops, 881 

ascending triangles, 987 

big M, 70 

big W, 87 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 219 

broadening bottoms/tops, 106, 166 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 611, 647 

cup with handle, 304 

descending broadening wedge, 202 

descending inverted scallops, 93 1 

descending scallops, 915 

descending triangles, 1011 

diamond bottoms/tops, 337, 354 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
431, 503 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 450, 
520 

falling wedges, 1142 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
596, 629 

horn bottoms/tops, 662, 676 


1236 


Index 


Busted occurrence (Continued) 

inverted cup with handle, 322 

inverted roof, 835 

island reversals, 694 

pipe bottoms/tops, 753, 768 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 785, 803 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 145 

rising wedges, 1159 

roof, 821 

three falling peaks, 947 

three rising valleys, 969 

top bump-and-run reversal, 239 

triple bottoms/tops, 1050, 1068 

V-bottoms/tops, 1084, 1114 

Busted patterns, 1201, 1202 

Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
391, 391, 468, 469 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
409-410, 410, 487, 488 

ascending broadening wedge, 186, 186 

ascending inverted scallops, 899, 899 

ascending scallops, 881, 882 

ascending triangles, 987, 988 

big M, 70, 70 

big W, 87, 87 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 219, 
219 

broadening bottoms/tops, 106, 107, 
166, 167 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 610, 611, 647, 647 

cup with handle, 304 

descending broadening wedge, 202, 
202-203 

descending inverted scallops, 931, 932, 
934 

descending scallops, 914, 914-915 

descending triangles, 1003, 1010-1011, 
1011 

diamond bottoms/tops, 337, 354, 355, 
357 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
431, 431, 502, 503 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 450, 
450, 520, 520 

falling wedges, 1142, 1142 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
596, 596, 628, 628-629, 631 


horn bottoms/tops, 661, 662, 676, 676 

inverted cup with handle, 321, 322 

inverted roof, 835, 835 

island reversals, 694, 694 

performance, 1201, 1203 

pipe bottoms/tops, 752, 752, 768, 768 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 785, 785, 803, 
803 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 125, 126 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 144, 145 

rising wedges, 1159, 1159 

roof, 820, 821 

symmetrical triangles, 1032, 1033, 
1035 

three falling peaks, 947, 947 

three rising valleys, 969, 969 

top bump-and-run reversal, 239, 239 

triple bottoms/tops, 1050, 1050, 1068 

V-bottoms/tops, 1084, 1084, 1114, 
1115, 1116 

Busted performance 

Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
391, 469 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
410, 488 

ascending broadening wedge, 187 

ascending inverted scallops, 899 

ascending scallops, 882 

ascending triangles, 988 

big M, 70 

big W, 87 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 219 

broadening bottoms/tops, 107, 
166-167 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 611, 647 

cup with handle, 304 

descending broadening wedge, 202 

descending inverted scallops, 93 1-932 

descending scallops, 915 

descending triangles, 1011 

diamond bottoms/tops, 337-338, 
354-355 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
431, 503 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 450, 
520-521 


falling wedges, 1142 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
596, 629 
horn bottoms/tops, 662, 676-677 
inverted cup with handle, 322 
inverted roof, 835 
island reversals, 694 
pipe bottoms/tops, 753, 768 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 785, 804 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 126 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 145 
rising wedges, 1160 
roof, 821 
symmetrical triangles, 1033 
three falling peaks, 947 
three rising valleys, 970 
top bump-and-run reversal, 240 
triple bottoms/tops, 1051, 1069 
V-bottoms/tops, 1084, 1114 
Busted three falling peaks, 949 
Busted trade 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
393, 490 
ascending broadening wedge, 188 
ascending triangles, 991 
big M, 73-74 
broadening bottoms/tops, 110, 170 
complex head-and-shoulders tops, 650 
descending broadening wedge, 204 
descending triangles, 1014 
diamond bottoms, 339-341 
Eve & Adam double tops, 505 
Eve & Eve double tops, 522-523 
falling wedges, 1144 
horn tops, 678 
inverted cup with handle, 323 
inverted roof, 836 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 787-788, 
805-806 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 128-129 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 148 
rising wedges, 1161-1162 
triple tops, 1072 
Busted V-top, trade, 1117 
Butler Manufacturing (BBR), 425, 875 


1237 


Index 


Buy-and-hold investments, 271 
Buy-and-hold situations, 709 

Buy breakout, diving board, 373 
Buy location, V-bottoms, 1085 

Buy point, ascending scallops, 884 
Buy signal, appearance (failure), 472 


C 

Cabot Corp (CBT), extended V-bottoms, 
1100 

Cabot Oil and Gas A (COG), diamond 
tops, 349 

Cache (CACH), Eve & Adam double 
bottoms, 43 5—437 

Caleres (CAL), bullish Gartley, 580, 584 

Canandalgua Brands Inc. (CBRNA), 194, 
840 

Caterpillar (CAT), top bump-and-run 
reversal, 233 

CB/AB retrace, 39, 55, 289, 580 

CD/CB extension, 39, 55, 258, 289, 580 

Celadon Group (CLDN) (CGD), ascend- 
ing triangles, 993 

Cemex (CX), triple bottoms, 1053-1054 

Centex Corp. (CTX), ascending broad- 
ening wedge, 191 

Central and South West (CSR), Adam & 
Eve double bottoms, 403 

Channels, display, 703 

Charles Schwab Corp. (GCHW), Adam 
& Adam double bottoms, 395 

Charming Shoppes (CHRS), complex 
head-and-shoulders bottoms, 603 

Chart patterns, 4-9, 16-17, 1212 

Checkpoint Systems (CKP), 432, 1003 

Chemtura (CEM), complex head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, 615 

CH Energy (CHG), Eve & Eve double 
bottoms, 454-455 

Chicos FAS Inc. (CHS), 20, 171-172 

Chiron (CHIR), Adam & Eve double 
bottoms, 400 

Circuit City Stores (CC), pennants, 728 

Cirrus Logic Inc (CRUS), island 
reversals, 696 

Cisco Systems (CSCO), 148-149, 332, 
993 

CKE Restaurants, Inc. (CKR), 209, 887 

Claires Stores (CLE), 401, 974 


1238 


Index 


Clean Energy Fuels Corp. (CLNE), 
price increase, 61 
Clorox Co The (CLX), extended V-tops, 
1122 
Close short, inverted cup with handle, 
323 
Closing the gap, 556, 1203 
Cloudbanks, 263-265 
bear market, 264, 266, 267, 268, 270 
buy signal, 275 
cloud base, 269, 270, 272 
cloud duration, 269 
companies, analysis, 264, 266, 268, 
272-274, 275 
crossover, 271 
dead-cat bounce, 273-274 
drop, 269, 270 
events, 266-267 
experience, 272-274 
failures, focus, 267 
hold time, 271 
identification guidelines, 265, 265-267 
level, V-bottoms, 1087 
lowest low, 271 
number found, 268 
patterns, rise, 269 
recovery, 267, 269 
scale, 265 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 269 
statistics, 268, 268-270 
stock, decline, 266 
trades, 270-272, 271, 274-276 
trend change, 269-270 
upward breakouts, 263 
volume, 270 
CNF Inc (CNF), Eve & Adam double 
tops, 495 
CNF Transportation (CNF), descending 
scallops, 907 
CNO Financial (CNO), 292, 309 
Cognex (CGNX), 194, 399, 496 
Cognizant Technology Solutions 
(CTSH), bottom bump-and-run 
reversal, 222 
Coherent (COHR), 382, 738-740, 739 
Columbus Mckinnon (CMCO), horn 
tops, 681 
Commodity channel index (CCI), 632, 
1037 


Common gaps, 557 
Complex head-and-shoulders bottoms, 

601-604, 613 

average rise, 607 

breakouts, 601, 605-606, 606, 608, 
609, 610, 616 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 611 

busted patterns, 610-611, 611 

companies, analysis, 602, 603, 605, 
606, 614, 614-615, 616 

confirmation, 606 

consolidation, 605 

cumulative failure rates, 608 

days to ultimate high, 607 

dual-head reversal, 603 

dual-shoulder complex head-and- 
shoulders bottom, 602 

experience, 613-615 

failures, 606-607, 610, 611 

gaps, 609 

height, 609 

horizontal neckline, 602 

identification guidelines, 604, 604-606 

inner head and shoulders, trading, 
612-613 

measure rule, targets, 611-612 

near horizontal neckline, 605 

neckline, 613, 685 

non-busted performance, 611 

number found, 607 

pattern, failure, 606 

performance over time, 610, 611 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 607 

rising/falling volume, 610 

shoulder lows, 613 

size statistics, 610 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 607 

statistics, 607, 607-611 

stop location, 613 

symmetry, 605 

throwbacks, 608-609, 613 

trades, 611-613, 612, 615-617 

trend change, 607 

triple busted complex head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, money loss, 614 

volume, 605, 609, 610 

weekly scale, 616 


width, 609 

yearly position, performance, 608 

Complex head-and-shoulders tops, 
636-639, 651 

Adam & Adam double tops, 462 

ascending broadening wedge, shape, 
642 

average decline, 643 

breakouts, 636, 641, 642, 644, 645, 646 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 647 

busted patterns/trades, 647, 647, 650 

companies, analysis, 637, 638, 640, 
642, 649 

confirmation, 641, 649 

cumulative failure rates, 644 

days to ultimate low, 643-644 

dead-cat bounce, 649, 652 

decline/rise, 650 

dual heads, 637 

failures, 641-643, 642, 647, 647 

gaps, 645 

height, 645 

highest high/neckline, difference 
computation, 649 

identification guidelines, 639-641, 640 

inner head-and-shoulders, rounding 
top appearance, 640 

knots, 650 

launch price, 649 

measure rule, 648-649 

multiple shoulders, 638 

neckline, 641, 651 

non-busted performance, 647 

number found, 643 

performance over time, 646, 647 

pullbacks, 644-645 

reversal, 638, 642 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 643 

rising/falling volume, 646 

roundness, 640 

shoulder highs, 651 

size statistics, 646 

stair-step pattern, 637 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 643 

statistics, 643, 643-647 

stop location, 650 

support, 650 


1239 


Index 


symmetry, 639, 641 
trades, 648, 648-652 
trend change, 644 
twin peaks, horn top appearance, 637 
volume, 638, 641, 646, 646 
width, 645 
yearly position, performance, 644 
Comsat Corp (CQ), top bump-and-run 
reversal, 241 
ConAgra Brands Inc (CAG), 120, 275 
Confirmation, 515, 1058, 1071, 1203 
Adam & Eve double tops, 482 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 606, 641 
Eve & Adam double tops, 497 
extended V-bottoms, 1092-1093 
falling wedges, 1135 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
590, 623 
horn bottoms/tops, 656, 671 
level, 1203 
lines, 383, 460, 461, 496, 511 
pipe bottoms/tops, 747, 762 
price, 463, 891, 1203 
rounding bottoms, 843 
three rising valleys, 964 
triple bottoms/tops, 1044, 1061-1062 
V-bottoms/tops, 1078, 1107 
Confirmation, wait 
ascending inverted scallops, 900 
complex head-and-shoulders tops, 649 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
598, 630 
horn bottoms, 665 
pipe bottoms, 754 
three falling peaks, 949 
three rising valleys, 971 
triple bottoms/tops, 1052-1071 
Confirmed double top, meaning, 9 
Congestion, support zone (impact), 498 
ConocoPhillips (COP), Adam & Adam 
double tops, #72 
Conseco Inc (CNC), pipe bottoms, 746 
Consolidation, 195, 1203 
Continental Building Products Inc 
(CBPX), big W (launch price, 
return), 79 
Continuation gaps, 559, 562, 362 
Continuation pattern, inverted roof, 828 


1240 


Index 


Continuations, 21, 21, 1203 
Converging trendlines, 728 
Con-way (CNW), right-angled descend- 
ing broadening formation, 150-151 
Coors, Adolph Co. (ACCOB), diamond 
bottoms, 327 
Corrective phase, 700-702, 708, 711, 
716, 716, 1203 
Costco Wholesale Corp (COST), diving 
board, 365 
Countertrend, 1203 
Cover on support, descending triangles, 
1014 
Covid-19, 362, 547, 680 
Crane Company (CR), inverted cup with 
handle, 315 
Cree Inc. (CREE), 46, 289 
Crompton and Knowles Co, descending 
triangles, 1003 
Crossing pattern, 979, 981, 1002 
Crossover, cloudbanks, 271 
CUC International (CU), ascending 
triangles, 977 
Cumulative failure rates, 1198 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
387, 466 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
406, 484 
ascending broadening wedge, 183 
ascending inverted scallops, 895 
ascending scallops, 877 
ascending triangles, 984 
big M, 66 
big W, 83 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 215 
broadening bottoms/tops, 102, 162 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 608, 644 
cup with handle, 301 
descending broadening wedge, 198 
descending inverted scallops, 927 
descending scallops, 910 
descending triangles, 1006 
diamond bottoms/tops, 334, 352 
diving board, 368 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
400, 427 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 446, 
517 


extended V-bottoms/tops, 1095, 1124 

falling wedges, 1138 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
593, 625 

high and tight flags, 548 

horn bottoms/tops, 659, 674 

inverted cup with handle, 318 

inverted roof, 831 

island reversals, 689 

pipe bottoms/tops, 749, 766 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 780, 799 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 123 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 141 

rising wedges, 1155 

roof, 817 

rounding bottoms/tops, 845, 863 

symmetrical triangles, 1028 

three falling peaks, 943 

three rising valleys, 966 

top bump-and-run reversal, 235 

triple bottoms/tops, 1047, 1064 

V-bottoms/tops, 1080, 1110 

Cup with handle, 294-296, 307 

5% failure, display, 299 

average rise, 300 

breakouts, 294, 297, 300, 301, 303 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 304 

busted patterns, 304, 304 

companies, analysis, 295, 297-299, 
306, 307-309 

cumulative failure rates, 301 

cup rim, 297 

days to ultimate high, 300 

duration, 297-298 

experience, 307-309 

failures, 298-299, 303, 304 

formation, bump-and-run reversal 
(impact), 295 

gaps, 302 

handles, 296-297, 306 

height, 302 

identification guidelines, 296, 296-298 

inner cup, purchase, 306 

measure rule, 305, 306 

non-busted performance, 304 

number found, 300 


pattern, 297 

performance over time, 303, 304 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 300 

rim, height, 307 

rising/falling volume, 302 

size statistics, 302 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 3090 

statistics, 299-304, 300 

stops, hit frequency, 303 

throwback occurrence, 301 

trades, 304-307, 305, 309-310 

trend change, 300 

trendline, 392 

up trend, 296 

U-shaped cup, 296 

volume statistics, 303 

volume trend, 302 

weekly scale, 298 

width, 302 

yearly position, performance, 300 

Cypress Semiconductor (CY), Eve & 

Eve double bottoms, 455-456 


D 

Database, usage, 3-4 

DA/XA, 47, 249, 281, 572 

Days to trend high, 533, 733 

Days to trend low, 533, 733 

Days to ultimate high, 1198, 1203 
Adam & Adam double bottoms, 387 
Adam & Eve double bottoms, 405 
ascending broadening wedge, 183 
ascending inverted scallops, 895 
ascending scallops, 877 
ascending triangles, 984 
big W, 82 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 214 
broadening bottoms/tops, 102, 161 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms, 

607 

cup with handle, 300 
descending broadening wedge, 198 
descending inverted scallops, 927 
descending triangles, 1005 
diamond bottoms/tops, 333, 351 
diving board, 368 
Eve & Adam double bottoms, 427 
Eve & Eve double bottoms, 446 


Index 1241 


extended V-bottoms/tops, 1095, 1124 

falling wedges, 1137 

head-and-shoulders bottoms, 592 

high and tight flags, 547 

horn bottoms, 658-659 

inverted roof, 831 

island reversals, 689 

pipe bottoms, 749 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 779, 798 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 122 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 140 

rising wedges, 1154 

roof, 816 

rounding bottoms/tops, 845, 862 

symmetrical triangles, 1028 

three rising valleys, 965 

triple bottoms, 1046 

V-bottoms, 1080 


Days to ultimate low, 1198, 1203 


Adam & Eve double tops, 484 

ascending broadening wedge, 183 

ascending scallops, 877 

ascending triangles, 984 

big M, 65 

broadening bottoms/tops, 102, 161 

complex head-and-shoulders tops, 
643-644 

descending broadening wedge, 198 

descending inverted scallops, 927 

descending triangles, 1005 

diamond bottoms/tops, 333, 351 

Eve & Adam double tops, 499 

Eve & Eve double tops, 516 

extended V-tops, 1124 

falling wedges, 1137 

head-and-shoulders tops, 625 

horn tops, 673 

inverted cup with handle, 317 

inverted roof, 831 

island reversals, 689 

pipe tops, 765 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 779, 798 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 122 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 140 

rising wedges, 1154 


1242 Index 


Days to ultimate low (Continued) 
roof, 816 
rounding tops, 862 
symmetrical triangles, 1028 
three falling peaks, 943 
top bump-and-run reversal, 234 
triple tops, 1064 
V-tops, 1109-1110 
DC/BC extension, 30, 47, 248, 281, 572 
Dead-cat bounce, 273-274, 564, 649, 
652, 850, 1023 
Decade, 1201 
Declining price trend, descending 
scallops, 905 
Dekalb Genetics (DKB), inverted cup 
with handle, 315 
Delphi Financial Group Inc. (DFG), 
symmetrical triangles, 1038 
Delphi Financial Group (DFG), rectan- 
gle tops, 808 
Delta Air Lines, Inc. (DAL), 511, 1133 
Descending and inverted scallops, 
921-923 
average decline/rise, 926 
beginning/end, display, 924 
breakouts, 921, 925, 927, 928, 930, 933 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 931 
busted patterns, 931, 931-932, 934 
companies, analysis, 923, 924, 934 
cumulative failure rates, 927 
days to ultimate high, 927 
days to ultimate low, 927 
downward breakouts, 922 
end points, 923 
entry/exit signal, 932, 933 
failures, 925, 931, 931 
gaps, 929 
height, 929, 930 
identification guidelines, 923-925, 924 
measure rule, targets, 932 
non-busted performance, 93 1-932 
number found, 926 
pattern failure, 925 
performance over time, 931, 931 
price trend, 923 
proportion, 924-925 
pullbacks, 928-929 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 926 


reversal/continuation performance, 
926 

rising/falling volume, 930 

size statistics, 929 

smooth top, 923 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 926 

statistics, 926, 926-932 

stock short, 934 

stops, 931, 934, 934 

support/resistance, search, 933 

throwbacks, 928-929 

trades, 932-935, 933 

trend change, 927 

upside-down J appearance, 923 

volume, 930, 930 

width, 930 

yearly position, performance, 928 

Descending broadening wedge, 192-194 

average decline/rise, 198 

breakouts, 192, 196, 199, 199, 201 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 202 

busted patterns/trades, 202, 202-204 

companies, analysis, 193-196, 
204-206, 207 

consolidation pattern, 195 

cumulative failure rates, 198 

days to ultimate high, 198 

days to ultimate low, 198 

experience, 204-205 

failures, 196-197, 201, 202 

gaps, 200 

height, 200, 201 

identification guidelines, 194-196, 195 

intermediate-term downward trend, 
reversal, 194 

measure rule, targets, 203-204 

non-busted performance, 202-203 

number found, 197 

partial rises/declines, 204 

performance over time, 201, 202 

price target, wedge (usage), 207 

price upward movement, failure, 196 

pullbacks, 199-200 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 197 

reversal/continuation performance, 
198 

rising/falling volume, 201 

size statistics, 200 


Standard & Poor's 500 change, 198 

statistics, 197, 197-203 

throwbacks, 199-200 

touches, 195-196 

trades, 203, 203-204, 206-207 

trend change, 198-199 

trendlines, 195 

upward trend, consolidation, 193 

volume, 196, 201, 201 

whitespace, 196 

width, 200-201 

yearly position, performance, 199 

Descending scallops, 904-906, 907 

average decline/rise, 910 

breakouts, 903, 906, 908, 908, 911, 
911, 916 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 91/4 

busted patterns, 914, 914-915 

companies, analysis, 905, 907, 908, 
917, 917-919, 919 

cumulative failure rates, 910 

days to ultimate high, 910 

days to ultimate low, 910 

declining price trend, 905 

ends, 906 

experience, 917-919 

failures, 907, 909, 914, 914 

gaps, 912 

heavy/light breakout day volume, 912 

height, 912 

identification guidelines, 905-906, 906 

measure rule, targets, 916 

non-busted performance, 915 

number found, 909 

overhead resistance, impact, 908 

performance over time, 913, 914 

price trend, 906 

pullbacks, 912 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 909 

reversal/continuation performance, 
909 

rising/falling volume, 912 

size statistics, 913 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 910 

statistics, 909, 909-915 

stops, 914, 916-917 

throwbacks, 912 

trades, 915, 915-917, 917, 919-920 


Index 1243 


trends, 910-911, 917 

triple tops, 1071 

upward price trend, reversal, 919 
volume, 906, 912, 913 

width, 912 

yearly position, performance, 912 


Descending triangles, 997-1001 


apex distance, 1008 

apex turning, 1014 

average decline/rise, 1005 

breakouts, 997, 998, 1003, 1007, 1010, 
1013-1014, 1020 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1011 

busted patterns/trades, 1010-1011, 
1011 

companies, analysis, 999, 1000, 1002, 
1003, 1013, 1015-1017, 1017 

cover on support, 1014 

creation, rectangle bottoms, 775 

crossing pattern, 1002 

cumulative failure rates, 1006 

days to ultimate high, 1005 

days to ultimate low, 1005 

down-sloping trendline, 1013 

downward volume trend, 999 

experience, 1014-1017 

failures, 1000, 1002, 1004, 1010, 1011 

gaps, 1008 

height, 1008 

horizontal resistance level, 999 

horn bottoms, 657 

identification, 1000-1002, 1001 

measure rule, 1012-1013, 1013, 1017 

non-busted performance, 1011 

number found, 1004 

performance over time, 1010, 10/1 

pullback, 999, 1008 

receding volume trend, 1000 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 1004 

reversal/continuation performance, 
1004 

rising/falling volume, 1010 

size statistics, 1009 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 1005 

statistics, 1004-1011, 1005 

stops, 1010, 1014 

support, 1003 

target price, 1013 


1244 Index 


Descending triangles (Continued) 
throwbacks, 1008 
trades, 1012, 1012-1014, 1017-1018 
trend change, 1006 
trendlines, 1001 
volume, 1002, 1008, 1009 
whitespace, 1003 
width, 1008 
yearly position, performance, 1008 
Devon Energy Corp. (DVN), 384, 444 
Diagonal diamonds, 340, 358 
Diamond bottoms, 326-329 
average decline/rise, 333 
breakouts, 326, 329-331, 332, 334, 
335, 336, 339 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 337 
busted patterns/trades, 337-341 
companies, analysis, 327, 330-332, 342 
cumulative failure rates, 334 
days to ultimate high, 333 
days to ultimate low, 333 
diagonal diamonds, 340 
diamond top/bottom, single-diagonal 
diamonds, 342 
downward price continuation, 331 
failures, 331-332, 337, 337 
gaps, 334-335 
height, 335 
identification guidelines, 328-331, 329 
measure rule, targets, 338-339 
non-busted performance, 337-338 
number found, 333 
performance over time, 336, 337 
price trend, 329 
pullbacks, 334 
quick rise/fall, 339 
receding volume trend, 330 
reversal, 327 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 333 
rising/falling volume, 335-336 
single-diagonal pattern, 341, 342 
size statistics, 336 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 333 
statistics, 333, 333-338 
support areas, location, 330 
throwbacks, 334 
trades, 338, 338-343 


trend change, 333 

two-diagonal diamond, 327 
two-diagonal pattern, 341-342 
volume, 329, 335, 336 

weekly scale, 330 

width, 335 

yearly position, performance, 334 


Diamond Offshore (DO), Eve & Eve 


double tops, 513 


Diamond tops, 344-346 


average decline/rise, 350 

breakouts, 344, 349, 349, 351, 352, 
354, 356 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 355 

busted patterns, 354-355, 355, 357 

companies, analysis, 345, 347-349, 
359 

cumulative failure rates, 352 

days to ultimate high, 351 

days to ultimate low, 351 

diagonal diamonds, 358 

dome-shaped volume, 359 

failures, 349-350, 354, 355 

gaps, 352-353 

height, 353 

identification guidelines, 346-349, 347 

measure rule, targets, 355-356 

non-busted performance, 354-355 

number found, 350 

performance over time, 354, 355 

price, 345, 346, 347, 348 

pullbacks, 351-352 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 350 

rising/falling volume, 353 

risk/reward, 356-357 

single-diagonal pattern, 357-359 

size statistics, 353 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 
350-351 

statistics, 350-355, 351 

support/resistance, 346-349, 348 

throwbacks, 351-352 

trades, 355-361, 356 

trend change, 351 

volume, 346, 353, 354 

width, 353 

yearly position, performance, 351 


Diana Corp (DNA), high and tight flags, 
543 
Dip, purchase, 9-12, 10 
Divergence, technical indication 
(three rising valleys), 974 
Diving board, 11, 362-365 
average rise, 368 
bounces, 372-374, 373 
breakouts, 362, 366, 370-371 
broadening top, appearance (weekly 
scale), 365 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 371, 371 
buy breakout, 373 
companies, analysis, 364-366, 374, 
374-376, 375 
cumulative failure rates, 368 
days to ultimate high, 368 
duration, 366 
experience, 374-376 
failures, 12, 366-367, 371, 371 
gap, Outfont Media (OUT), 13 
height, 369-370 
identification guidelines, 364-366, 365 
length, performance (contrast), 374 
lower plunge, 373 
measure rule, targets, 371-372 
number found, 367 
patterns, 366, 375 
performance over time, 371, 371 
plunge, 366, 373-374 
profit, weekly scale, 374 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 367 
reversal/continuation performance, 
368 
rising/falling volume, 370 
size statistics, 369 
Standard & Poo’s 500 change, 368 
statistics, 367, 367-371 
stops, hit frequency, 370 
trades, 371-373, 372, 377-378 
trend change, 368 
upward move, weekly scale, 364 
volume, 366, 370, 370 
weekly scale, 11 
width, 369 
DJ 30 Industrials (DJD, three peaks and 
domed house, 955-958 


Index 1245 


Double bottoms, 4-5, 5, 17, 411, 853, 
1071 
Double bust, 1024, 1205 
DoubleClick, Inc (DCLK), Eve & Eve 
double tops, 514 
Double tops, 9, 17, 669, 717 
Dow Chemical Co. (DOW), diamond 
bottoms, 342 
Downhill run, top bump-and-run 
reversal, 232 
Down-sloping neckline, head-and- 
shoulders tops, 620 
Down-sloping top trendline, lead-in 
height (bottom bump-and-run 
reversal), 211 
Down-sloping trend channel, formation, 
702 
Down-sloping trendline, 137, 323, 324, 
1013, 1133 
Down-sloping volume trend, ascending 
triangles, 995 
Downtrends, 663, 744, 763 
Downward adjacent spikes, pipe bot- 
toms, 745 
Downward breakouts, 538 
Adam & Adam double tops, 458 
Adam & Eve double tops, 476 
ascending broadening wedge, 175 
ascending scallops, 872, 875 
ascending triangles, 976 
Bearish Wolfe wave, 1164 
big M, 60, 64 
broadening bottoms/tops, 95, 100, 154 
complex head-and-shoulders tops, 636 
descending broadening wedge, 192 
descending inverted scallops, 922 
descending scallops, 904, 908 
descending triangles, 998 
diamond bottoms/tops, 326, 344 
Eve & Adam double tops, 494 
Eve & Eve double tops, 510 
falling wedges, 1132 
flags, 527 
head-and-shoulders tops, 618 
horn tops, 668 
impact, descending triangles, 1003 
inverted cup with handle, 311 
inverted roof, 825 
investor trade, pipe tops, 764 


1246 Index 


Downward breakouts (Continued) 
island tops, 683 
pennants, 727 
pipe tops, 760 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 774, 793 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 114-115 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 132 
rising wedges, 1148-1149 
roof, 811 
rounding tops, 856 
symmetrical triangles, 1020, 1024, 
1034 
three falling peaks, 936 
top bump-and-run reversal, 227 
triple tops, 1057 
Downward gaps, close within a week, 
555 
Downward moves, 27, 44, 245, 277, 548 
Downward price spikes, horn bottoms, 
654 
Downward price trend, 401, 778, 812, 
963 
Downward spikes, ascending triangles, 
980 
Downward-tilting flag, 538 
Downward trends, 754, 769, 1077 
Downward volume trend, 982, 999, 1090 
D.R. Horton Inc. (DHD), descending 
broadening wedge, 204-205 
Dril-Quip Inc (DRQ), V-tops, 1107 
Dual bumps, 212, 214, 216-217, 232, 
1204 
Dual-head reversal, complex head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, 603 
Dual heads, complex head-and-shoulders 
tops, 637 
Dual-shoulder complex head-and- 
shoulders bottom, 602 
Duration 
bearish AB=CD, 31 
bearish bat, 47 
bearish butterfly, 249 
bearish crab, 281 
bearish Gartley, 572 
big M, 63 
bullish AB=CD, 39 
bullish bat, 56 


bullish butterfly, 258 

bullish crab, 289 

bullish Gartley, 581 

cloud duration, 269 

cup with handle, 297-298 

diving board, 366 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1093, 1122 

falling wedges, 1135 

flags, 530 

high and tight flags, 545 

island reversals, 685, 686 

pennants, 730 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 777, 796 

rising wedges, 1152 

roof, 814 

symmetrical triangles, 1023-1024 

V-bottoms/tops, 1078, 1107 
Duriron (DURD, pennants, 740-741 


E 

Early entry, 948, 971 

Eaton Corp. (ETN), ascending broaden- 
ing wedge, 181 

Echlin, Inc (ECH), complex head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, 605 

Edwards, A.G. (AGE), right-angled 
ascending broadening formation, 
115 

Elk Corp (ELK), #77, 961 

EMC Corp. (EMC), cup with handle, 
308 

EMC (EMC), pipe bottoms, 755 

Emerson Electric Co (EMR), island 
reversals, 687 

Encore Wire (WIRE), rounding 
bottoms, 852 

End points, descending inverted scallops, 
923 

Ends, descending scallops, 906 

Energy East Corp. (EAS), big W, 92 

Energy Select Sector SPDR fund (XLE), 
measured move down, 710-711 

Engelhard Corporation (EC), Adam & 
Adam double bottoms, 380 

ENSCO International (ESV), Eve & 
Eve double bottoms, 439 

Entry signal, descending inverted 
scallops, 932 

Era Group Inc (ERA), 56, 93 


Esterline Technologies (ESL), target 
price computation (measure rule 
usage), 169 

Estimated Time of Arrival (ETA) line, 
1166, 1168, 1172 

Estimate Price at Arrival (EPA) line, 
1166, 1168, 1172 

Eve & Adam double bottoms, 419-422, 
434 

5% failure, 425 

bottom to bottom variation, 433 

breakouts, 414, 419, 424, 427, 428, 
430, 433 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 430 

busted patterns, 431, 431 

companies, analysis, 420-422, 424, 
425, 432, 434-437 

cumulative failure rates, 427 

days to ultimate high, 427 

downward price trend, 420 

experience, 434-437 

failures, 424-426, 430, 430 

gaps, 428 

height, 428, 429 

identification guidelines, 42 1-424, 423 

industry check, 433 

lower bottom, 433-434 

low price, 423 

measure rule, targets, 431, 433 

narrowing ascending scallop, sale, 432 

non-busted performance, 431 

pattern validity, 422 

performance over time, 430, 430 

price trend, 423 

right bottom, price rise, 423 

rise between bottoms, 423 

rising/falling volume, 430 

separation, 423 

size statistics, 429 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 427 

statistics, 426, 426-431 

stops, #30, 433 

throwbacks, 428 

trades, 431-434, 432, 437 

trend change, 427 

volume, 423, 424, 429, 429 

V-shaped Adam bottom, #21 

width, 429 


Index 1247 


yearly position, performance, 427-428 


Eve & Adam double tops, 494-496, 505 


average decline, 499 

breakouts, 497, 500, 502, 504-505 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 503 

busted patterns/trades, 502-503, 503, 
505 

companies, analysis, 495, 496, 498, 
506, 506-507, 508 

confirmation, 496, 497 

congestion, support zone (impact), 498 

cumulative failure rates, 500 

days to ultimate low, 499 

downward breakouts, 494 

experience, 506-507 

failures, 498, 502, 503 

gaps, 501 

height, 501 

identification guidelines, 496-497, 497 

industry check, 505 

island reversal chart pattern, 495 

lower top, 505 

measure rule, targets, 503-504 

non-busted performance, 503 

number found, 499 

performance over time, 502, 503 

price trend, 496 

pullbacks, 501 

reversal (R), continuation (C) occur- 
rence, 499 

right top, price decline, 497 

rise/decline, 508 

rising/falling volume, 502 

sell signal, double top usage, 506 

size statistics, 5O1 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 499 

statistics, 499, 499-503 

stops, 502, 505 

top high price, 497 

top separation, 497 

top-to-top variation, 505 

trades, 503-505, 504, 507-509 

trend change, 499 

valleys, 497 

volume, 495, 497, 501-502, 502 

width, 501 

yearly position, performance, 
500-501 


1248 Index 


Eve & Eve double bottoms (EEDBs), 

438-440, 453 

Adam bottom, 443 

average rise, 446 

bottom-to-bottom variation, +53 

breakouts, 438, 442, 447, 447, 449, 
452, 452 

broadening bottom, impact, 439 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 450 

busted patterns, 450, 450 

companies, analysis, 439, 441, 443, 
444, 452, 453-456 

confirmation, 442-443 

cumulative failure rates, 446 

days to ultimate high, 446 

experience, 453-456 

failures, 443, 445, 450, 450 

gaps, 447 

height, 448 

identification guidelines, 440-443, 
44] 

industry check, 452 

lower bottoms/lows, 441, 453 

low price, 442 

measure rule, targets, 451-452 

minor lows, 444 

non-busted performance, 450 

number found, 445-446 

one-day downward price spikes, 443 

performance over time, 449, 450 

prices, 440, 444 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 446 

right bottom, price rise, 442 

rise between bottoms, 441-442 

rising/falling volume, 449 

separation, 442 

size statistics, 448 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 446 

statistics, 445, 445-450 

stops, hit frequency, 449 

throwbacks, 447 

trades, 451, 451-453, 456-457 

trend change, 446-447 

volume, 442, 448, 449 

V-shaped right bottom, 444 

width, 448 

yearly position, performance, 447 


Eve & Eve double tops, 510-512, 523, 


524 

average decline, 516 

breakouts, 510, 514-515, 517, 517, 
519-520 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 520 

busted patterns, 520, 520-523 

companies, analysis, 11, 513-515, 524 

confirmation line/point, 510, 515 

cumulative failure rates, 517 

days to ultimate law, 516 

decline, completion, 524 

failures, 515-516, 520, 520 

gaps, 518 

height, 518-519 

identification guidelines, 512, 512-515 

industry check, 522 

knot, writing, 523 

lower top, 524 

measure rule, 521-522 

non-busted performance, 520-521 

number found, 516 

peaks, reversal role, 513 

performance over time, 520, 520 

price trend, 512-513 

pullbacks, 518 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 516 

right top, price decline, 513 

rise, profitability, 524 

rising/falling volume, 519 

size statistics, 318 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 516 

statistics, 516, 516-521 

stops, 519, 522 

top high price, 513 

top separation, 513 

top-to-top variation, 523 

trades, 521, 521-525 

trend change, 516-517, 522 

twin peak, validation, 511 

upward price trend reversal, 514 

valleys, 513 

volume, 514, 519, 519 

width, 518 

yearly position, performance, 518 


Even end price, rounding tops, 859 
Even ends, ascending scallops, 884 


Evolent Health, Inc (EVH), 72, 257 
Evolution of a Trader (Bulkowski), 556 
Ex-dividend gaps, 559 
Exhaustion gaps, 559-560, 563, 563, 564, 
809 
Exit signal, descending inverted scallops, 
933 
ExpressJet Holdings (XJT), descending 
triangles, 1016 
Extended downtrend, horn tops, 672 
Extended V-bottoms, 1090, 1090-1092, 
1118 
average rise, 1094 
breakouts, 1089, 1092-1093, 1093, 
1096, 1096, 1098 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1098 
companies, analysis, 1090, 1092, 1093, 
1100, 1102 
confirmation, 1092-1093 
cumulative failure rates, 1095 
days to ultimate high, 1095 
downward volume trend, 1090 
duration, 1093 
experiences, 1100-1102 
extension, 1092, 1096 
failures, 1093-1094, 1098, 1098 
formation, 287 
gaps, 1097 
height, 1097-1098 
identification guidelines, 1091, 
1091-1093 
measure rule, targets, 1099-1100 
number found, 1094 
one-winning trade, 1100 
pattern, completion, 1092 
performance over time, 1098, 1098 
plunge, 1092 
purchase, 1100 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 1094 
reversal/continuation performance, 
1094 
rising/falling volume, 1098 
size statistics, 1097 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 
1094-1095 
statistics, 1094, 1094-1099 
throwbacks, 1096-1097 


Index 1249 


trades, 1099, 1099-1100, 1102, 
1102-1103 

trend change, 1095-1096 

two-losing trade, 1100 

volume, 1092, 1098, 1098 

width, 1097 

yearly position, performance, 1096 


Extended V-tops, 1119-1121 


average decline, 1123-1124 

breakouts, 1118, 1121-1122, 1122, 
1125, 1125, 1127-1128 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1128 

companies, analysis, 1120-1122, 
1130 

cumulative failure rates, 1124 

days to ultimate high, 1124 

days to ultimate low, 1124 

duration, 1122 

exit, 1130 

extension, 1121, 1125 

failures, 1122-1123, 1128, 1128 

formation, 1119 

gaps, 1126 

height, 1126-1127 

identification guidelines, 1120, 
1120-1122 

launch price, stock price return, 1121 

measure rule, targets, 1128 

number found, 1123 

performance over time, 1128, 1128 

pullbacks, 1126 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 1123 

reversal/continuation performance, 
1123 

rise, 1121 

rising/falling volume, 1127 

short sale, risk, 1128-1129 

size statistics, 1126 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 1124 

statistics, 1123, 1123-1128 

trades, 1128-1130, 1129 

trend change, 1124-1125 

upward price breakout, 1122 

volume, 1121, 1127, 1127 

width, 1127 

yearly position, performance, 1125 


Exxon Mobil Corp (XOM), #79, 1177 


1250 Index 


F 
F5 Networks (FFIV), bearish Gartley, 
S71 
Failed partial rise, 177-178 
Failure, 33, 559, 1045, 1190-1196, 1198, 
1204 
Failures, focus 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
384-386, 463-464 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
404, 482-484 
ascending broadening wedge, 181-182 
ascending inverted scallops, 892, 894 
ascending scallops, 874-876 
bearish AB=CD, 31-32 
bearish bat, 48-49 
bearish butterfly, 249-251 
bearish crab, 281-282 
bearish Gartley, 572-573 
bearish Wolfe wave, 1168-1169 
big M, 64-65 
big W, 80-81 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 213 
broadening bottoms/tops, 100-101, 
159 
bullish AB=CD, 39-40 
bullish bat, 56 
bullish butterfly, 258-260 
bullish Gartley, 581-582 
cloudbanks, 267 
complex head-and-shoulders tops, 
641-643 
cup with handle, 298-299 
descending broadening wedge, 196-197 
descending inverted scallops, 925 
descending scallops, 907, 909 
descending triangles, 1002, 1004 
diamond bottoms/tops, 33 1-332, 
349-350 
diving board, 366-367 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
424-426, 498 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 443, 
445, 515-516 
extended V-bottoms/tops, 1093-1094, 
1122-1123 
falling wedges, 1135-1136 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
590-592, 623-624 


high and tight flags, 546 

horn bottoms, 656-658 

inverted cup with handle, 314, 
316-317 

inverted roof, 829-830 

pennants, 731 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 777-778, 
797-798 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 119-121 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 138-139 

rising wedges, 1152-1153 

roof, 814-815 

rounding bottoms/tops, 843-844, 
859-860 

symmetrical triangles, 1025-1027 

three falling peaks, 940-942 

three rising valleys, 964 

top bump-and-run reversal, 232-233 

triple bottoms/tops, 1044-1045, 
1062-1063 

V-bottoms/tops, 1078-1079, 
1107-1108 


Failures over time 


Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
390, 390, 468, 469 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
409, 409, 487, 487 

ascending broadening wedge, 186, 186 

ascending inverted scallops, 898, 898 

ascending scallops, 881, 881 

ascending triangles, 987, 988 

bearish Wolfe wave, 1171 

big M, 69, 69 

big W, 86, 87 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 218, 
219 

broadening bottoms/tops, 106, 106, 
166, 166 

bullish Wolfe wave, 1181 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 610, 611, 647, 647 

cup with handle, 303, 304 

descending broadening wedge, 201, 
202 

descending inverted scallops, 931, 931 

descending scallops, 914, 914 

descending triangles, 1010, 1011 


diamond bottoms/tops, 337, 337, 354, 
355 

diving board, 371, 371 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
430, 430, 502, 503 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 450, 
450, 520, 520 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1098, 1098, 
1128, 1128 

falling wedges, 1141, 1142 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
595, 596, 628, 628 

high and tight flags, 550, 551 

horn bottoms/tops, 660, 661, 676, 676 

inverted cup with handle, 321, 321 

inverted roof, 834, 834 

island reversals, 693, 694 

pipe bottoms/tops, 752, 752, 768, 768 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 784, 784, 803, 
803 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 125 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 144, 144 

rising wedges, 1158, 1159 

roof, 820, 820 

rounding bottoms/tops, 848, 848, 866, 
866 

symmetrical triangles, 1032, 1032 

three falling peaks, 946, 946 

three rising valleys, 969, 969 

top bump-and-run reversal, 239, 239 

triple bottoms/tops, 1050, 1050, 1068, 
1068 

V-bottoms/tops, 1083, 1084, 1114, 
1114 

Fairchild Corporation A (FA), Eve & Eve 

double tops, 515, 553 

Falling volume, rising volume (contrast), 

24, 24 

Falling wedges, 1131-1133 

5% failure, 1136 

apex distance, 1139 

average decline/rise, 1137 

bottom trendline, relationship, 1147 

breakouts, 1131, 1132, 1135, 1136, 
1139, 1139, 1141, 1144 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1141 


1251 


Index 


busted patterns/trades, 1142, 1142, 
1144 
companies, analysis, 1133, 1134, 1136, 
1144, 1145-1146, 1146, 1147 
cumulative failure rates, 1138 
days to ultimate high, 1137 
days to ultimate low, 1137 
dip, observation, 1144 
down-sloping trendlines, 1133 
duration, 1135 
experience, 1145-1146 
failures, 1135-1136, 1141, 1142 
gaps, 1140 
head-and-shoulders bottom, 1147 
height, 1140-1141 
identification guidelines, 1133-1135, 
1134 
measure rule, targets, 1143-1144 
multiple touches, 1134-1135 
non-busted performance, 1142 
number found, 1137 
performance over time, 1141, 1142 
pullbacks, 1140 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 1137 
reversal/continuation performance, 
1137 
rising/falling volume, 1141 
size statistics, 1140 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 
1137 
statistics, 1137, 1137-1142 
target price, 1144 
throwbacks, 1140 
trades, 1143, 1143-1144, 1146, 
1146-1147 
trend change, 1138 
trendline touches, 1134 
volume, 1135, 1140, 1141 
width, 1140 
yearly position, performance, 1139 
Family Dollar (FDO), 414-416, 524 
Fastenal Company (FAST), ascending 
triangles, 995 
Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) meeting, impact, 110 
FedEx (FDX), 12, 1151 
Ferro (FOE), rounding bottoms, 
852-853 


1252 Index 


Fibonacci-based patterns, 28, 52, 246, 
251, 255, 258, 286, 578 
Fibonacci extension, 29 
Fibonacci numbers, 35, 258, 281 
Fibonacci patterns, 281, 577 
Fibonacci ratios, 27-30, 36, 52, 255 
Fibonacci retracements, usage, 128 
Fieldcrest Cannon Inc (FLD), top 
bump-and-run reversal, 229 
Filene’s Basement Corp (BSMT), 
descending triangles, 999 
First leg, 700, 702, 714 
5% failure 
Adam & Adam double tops, 464 
display, 299 
Eve & Adam double bottoms, 425 
falling wedges, 1136 
head-and-shoulders bottoms, 591 
pipe bottoms, 747 
rectangle tops, 797 
rising wedges, 1152 
symmetrical triangles, 1026 
triple tops, 1062 
Five-point reversal, 96, 158 
Flagpole, 530, 551, 728-729, 1204 
Flags, 526-527, 529, 529-530, 539, 540 
average decline/rise, 533 
breakouts, 526-527, 530, 533-534, 
534, 536 
bull markets, performance over time, 
536 
companies, analysis, 28, 529, 531, 537 
consolidation, 545 
days to trend high, 533 
days to trend low, 533 
downward-tilting flag, 538 
duration, 530 
failures, 530-532, 539 
gaps, 533 
height, 534 
identification guidelines, 528-530, 
529 
measure rule, 531, 536-538, 537 
multipliers, 539 
number found, 532 
parallel trendlines, 527 
pennants, pattern comparison, 
702-704 
performance over time, 536 


prices, 528, 530, 531, 539, 540 
receding volume pattern, 528 
recognition, 540 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 533 
reversal/continuation performance, 
533 
rising/falling volume, 534, 536 
size statistics, 535 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 533 
statistics, 532, 532-536 
stock decline (gauging), measure rule 
(usage), 537 
target, sell order placement, 540 
tilt, 538 
time move, 538-539 
top flag trendline, price close, 540 
trades, 536-539, 537, 541 
up-tilting flag, 538 
upward-tilting flag, 538 
volume, 530, 534, 535 
width, 534 
yearly position, performance, 533 
Flat base, 1204 
Fleetwood Enterprises (FLE), 179, 330, 
420, 700 
Flightsafety Intl. Inc., 147, 404 
Flowserve Corp (FLS), 444, 1121 
Flowserve (FLS), pennants, 740 
Fluor Corp (FLR), rectangle tops, 796 
FMC Corp. (FMC), rectangle tops, 
806-807 
Forest Oil Corp (FST), 1055 
Formation, 562, 563, 790, 1204 
Form Factor Inc (FORM), V-tops, 
1117 
Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold 
(FCX), 723, 1145-1146, 1146 
Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold B 
(FCX), 971-972, 972, 1130 
Frequency distribution, 1204 
Frontier Airline, Inc FRNT), pennants, 
730 
Frontier Airlines, Inc (FRNT), descend- 
ing inverted scallops, 924 
Frontier Oil Corp. (FTO), descending 
triangles, 1017 
Fruit of the Loom (FTL), rising wedges, 
1161 


Gaps, 555-567, 1204 

Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
388, 467 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
407, 485 

area gaps, 557, 557, 559, 560, 560-561 

ascending broadening wedge, 184 

ascending inverted scallops, 896 

ascending scallops, 879 

ascending triangles, 985 

average gap size, 561, 562, 1199 

big M, 67 

big W, 84 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 216 

breakaway gap, 557-558, 561-562, 562 

breakout gap, 1202 

broadening bottoms/tops, 104, 162 

closing, 556, 1203 

common gaps, 557 

companies, analysis, 357, 559, 564, 
566, 566-567 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 609, 645 

continuation gaps, 559, 562, 562 

cup with handle, 302 

daily price chart, 557 

descending inverted scallops, 929 

descending scallops, 912 

descending triangles, 1008 

diamond bottoms/tops, 334-335, 
352-353 

downward gaps, close within a week, 
555 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
428, 501 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 447, 
518 

ex-dividend gaps, 559 

exhaustion gaps, 559-560, 563, 563 

experience, 566-567 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1097, 1126 

falling wedges, 1140 

flags, 533 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
594, 627 

high and tight flags, 549 

identification guidelines, 557-560, 558 

inverted cup with handle, 319 


1253 


Index 


inverted roof, 832 
opening gap, 560 
pattern gaps, 557 
pennants, 734 
performance with breakout day gap, 
1199 
performance without breakout day 
gap, 1199 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 782, 800 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 142 
rising wedges, 1156 
roof, 818 
rounding bottoms/tops, 846, 863 
statistics, 560—563 
symmetrical triangles, 1029 
three falling peaks, 945 
three rising valleys, 966-967 
trades, 563-566, 564 
triple bottoms/tops, 1048, 1066 
upward gaps, close within a week, 555 
V-bottoms/tops, 1082, 1112 
volume pattern/position, impact, 559 
Gateway Inc (GTW), Eve & Eve double 
bottoms, 452 
Gatx Corp. (GMT), descending broad- 
ening wedge, 207 
Gearish crab, 280 
Genentech, Inc (GNE), cup with handle 
(weekly scale), 298 
General Mills Inc (GIS), 441, 778 
Genworth Financial (GNW), measured 
move up, 723 
Georgia Gulf Corporation (GGOC), 529, 
566, 566-567, 905 
Georgia Pacific Corp (GP), 1060, 1152 
Giant Industries, Inc (GI), Adam & Eve 
double tops, 481 
Gillette Co. (G), 348, 980 
Gleason Corp. (GLE), 917, 917-918, 
1024 
Global Industries, Ltd (GLBL), Eve & 
Adam double tops, 498 
Goldman Sachs Group, The (GS), 
bullish AB=CD pattern (upward 
breakout), 38 
Good till canceled (GTO), 172 
Graco (GGG), head-and-shoulders tops, 
631 


1254 Index 


Great Atlantic and Pacific (GAP), 619, 
873 

Guess Inc. (GES), Eve & Eve double 
bottoms, 453-454 


H 
Handles, 296-297, 306, 850, 884, 1204 
Hanesbrand Inc. (HBI), AB=CD pur- 
chase (loss), 42 
Hard stop, 1204 
Hartford Financial Services Group Inc., 
triple tops, 1072-1073 
Hawaiian Electric (HE), measured move 
up, 723 
Head-and-shoulders bottoms, 63, 
585-588, 598, 1147 
5% failure, 591 
ascending triangles, 980, 981 
average rise, 592 
breakouts, 585, 587, 590, 590, 593, 
593, 595, 597 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 595 
busted patterns, 596, 596 
companies, analysis, 386, 587, 
589-591, 597 
confirmation, 590, 598 
cumulative failure rates, 593 
days to ultimate high, 592 
early buy-in, 598 
experience, 598-599 
failures, 590-592, 595, 596, 599 
gaps, 594 
height, 594-595, 597 


identification guidelines, 588, 588-590 


lower head, 586 

measure rule, 596-598, 597 

neckline, 589, 597, 598 

non-busted performance, 596 

number found, 592 

performance over time, 595, 595 

post-breakout statistics, 593 

prices, 591, 599 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 592 

shoulder lows, 598 

shoulder troughs, 586 

size statistics, 594 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 592 


statistics, 592, 592-596 
symmetry, 589 

throwbacks, 594, 598 

trades, 596-598, 597, 599-600 
trend change, 592-593 
uptrend consolidation, 589 
usage, 629 

volume, 589, 591, 595, 595 
weekly time scale, 587 

width, 594 

yearly position, performance, 594 


Head-and-shoulders, inverted cup with 


handle, 323 


Head-and-shoulders tops, 618-622, 1117 


average decline, 624-625 

breakouts, 618, 623, 626, 626, 627 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 628 

busted patterns, 628, 628-629, 631 

companies, analysis, 619, 620, 622, 
623, 630, 631-633, 632, 634 

complex head-and-shoulders top 
pattern, 622 

confirmation, 623, 623, 630 

consolidation, 623 

cumulative failure rates, 625 

days to ultimate low, 625 

down-sloping neckline, 620 

experience, 63 1-633 

failures, 623-624, 628, 628 

formation, triple tops, 1058 

gaps, 627 

height, 627 

identification guidelines, 621, 621-623 

measure rule, 629-630, 630 

neckline, 619, 622-623, 630, 634 

non-busted performance, 629 

number found, 624 

performance over time, 628, 628 

profit disappearance, avoidance, 632 

pullbacks, 626 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 624 

roof, relationship, 814 

signal, AES Corp (AES), 5 

size statistics, 627 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 625 

statistics, 624, 624-629 

symmetry, 622 


target price, 630 
trades, 629, 629-631, 633-635 
trend change, 625-626 
volume, 620, 622, 627, 628 
width, 627 
yearly position, performance, 626 
Headwaters (HW), ascending triangles, 
994 
Healthcare Compare (HCCC), descend- 
ing broadening pattern, 139 
Health Management Systems (HMSY), 
ascending triangles, 994 
Heavy breakout day volume, light 
breakout day volume (contrast), 24, 
25 
Heavy left/right volume performance, 
1204 
Heavy/light breakout volume, 912 
Heavy/light breakout volume perfor- 
mance, 1200 
Height 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
388-389, 467 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
407, 486 
addition, head-and-shoulders bottoms, 
597 
ascending broadening wedge, 184 
ascending inverted scallops, 897 
ascending scallops, 879-880 
ascending triangles, 985 
big M, 67 
big W, 84 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 217 
broadening bottoms/tops, 104-105, 
163-164 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 609, 645 
cup with handle, 302 
descending broadening wedge, 200 
descending inverted scallops, 929 
descending scallops, 912 
descending triangles, 1008 
diamond tops, 353 
diving board, 369 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
428, 501 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 448, 
518 


1255 


Index 


extended V-bottoms/tops, 1097, 
1126-1127 

falling wedges, 1140 

flags, 534 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
594-595, 627 

high and tight flags, 549 

horn bottoms/tops, 660, 674 

inverted cup with handle, 319-320 

inverted roof, 832 

island reversals, 6902 

lead-in height, 1205 

pennants, 734 

performance, 22, 22 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 782, 801 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 124 

rising wedges, 1157 

roof, 819 

rounding bottoms/tops, 846, 864 

symmetrical triangles, 1029 

three falling peaks, 945 

three rising valleys, 967-968 

top bump-and-run reversal, 236, 238 

triple bottoms/tops, 1048, 1066 

V-bottoms/tops, 1082, 1113 


Height and width performance, 1200 
Height/width combinations 


Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
389, 467 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
408, 486 

ascending broadening wedge, 184 

ascending inverted scallops, 897 

ascending scallops, 880 

ascending triangles, 986 

big M, 68 

big W, 85 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 217 

broadening bottoms/tops, 105, 164 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 609, 645 

cup with handle, 302 

descending broadening wedge, 201 

descending inverted scallops, 930 

descending scallops, 912 

descending triangles, 1008 

diamond bottoms/tops, 335, 353 

diving board, 369-370 


1256 


Index 


Height/width combinations (Continued) 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
429, 501 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 448, 
518-519 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1097-1098, 
1127 

falling wedges, 1140-1141 

flags, 534 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
594, 627 

high and tight flags, 549 

inverted cup with handle, 320 

inverted roof, 833 

island reversals, 692 

pennants, 735 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 783, 801 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 124 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 143 

rising wedges, 1157 

roof, 819 

rounding bottoms/tops, 847, 865 

symmetrical triangles, 1030 

three falling peaks, 945 

three rising valleys, 968 

top bump-and-run reversal, 238 

triple bottoms/tops, 1049, 1066 

V-bottoms/tops, 1083, 1113 

Hercules, Inc. (HPC), 111-112, 755-756 

High and tight flags, 542, 543, 545 

average rise, 547 

breakouts, 542, 545, 547, 548, 549 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 550 

companies, analysis, 543, 544, 546, 
592;.593 

consolidation, 545 

cumulative failure rates, 548 

days to ultimate high, 547 

duration, 545 

experience, 552-553 

failures, 546, 550, 551 

flagpole tops, 551 

gaps, 549 

height, 549 

identification guidelines, 544-545, 545 

measure rule, targets, 551 


number found, 547 
performance over time, 550, 551 
price, 543, 544, 546, 553 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 547 
rising/falling volume, 549 
size statistics, 549 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 547 
statistics, 546-551, 547 
stops, 550, 552 
throwbacks, 548-549 
trades, 551, 551-554 
trend change, 547 
volume, 545, 549, 550 
width, 549 
yearly position, performance, 548 
Hills, 30, 39 
Hi-tech Pharmacal (HITS), pipe 
bottoms, 756-757 
Hold time, cloudbanks, 271 
Hold time loss, 1204 
Hologix Inc (HOLX), bullish Wolfe 
wave, 1182 
Home Depot, Inc (HD), 471, 508 
Homestake Mining (HM), horn tops, 
671 
Honeywell International Inc. (HON), 
1069, 1073, 1203 
Horizontal base, right-angled ascending 
broadening formation, 115 
Horizontal bottom support line, right- 
angled ascending broadening 
formation, 118-119 
Horizontal neckline, 602, 980 
Horizontal rectangle, 530 
Horizontal resistance level, descending 
triangles, 999 
Horizontal top, 137, 977 
Horizontal trendlines, 210, 777, 795, 814 
Horn bottoms, 653-655, 664, 676 
average rise, 658 
breakouts, 656, 659, 659, 660 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 661 
busted patterns, 661, 662, 662 
companies, analysis, 654, 656, 657, 
665, 665-666, 667 
confirmation, 656, 665 
cumulative failure rates, 659 


days to ultimate high, 658-659 

descending triangle, 657 

downtrends, 663 

downward price spikes, 654 

downward trend, 656 

experience, 665-666 

failures, 656-658, 657, 660, 661 

height, 660 

identification, 655, 655-656, 662 

lower spike, 664 

measure rule, targets, 662 

non-busted performance, 662 

number found, 658 

performance over time, 660, 661 

post-breakout statistics, 659 

price difference, 664-665 

reversal (R), confirmation (C) 
occurrence, 658 

rising/falling volume, 660 

size statistics, 661 

spike height performance, 664 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 658 

statistics, 658, 658-662 

stops, 661, 663 

throwback, 667 

trades, 662-667, 663, 665 

trend change, 659 

uptrends, 662-663 

upward breakouts, 653 

upward trend, 656 

visibility, 655-656 

volume, 660, 661 

weekly chart, 667 

yearly position, performance, 660 

Horn tops, 637, 668-670, 678-679, 680 

average decline, 673 

bear market drop, holding sale, 681 

breakouts, 668, 671, 674, 674-676 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 676 

busted patterns, 676, 676-678 

companies, analysis, 669, 671, 672, 681 

confirmation, 671 

cumulative failure rates, 674 

days to ultimate low, 673 

double top, representation, 669 

extended downtrend, 672 

failures, 671-672, 676, 676 

height, 674 


Index 1257 


identification guidelines, 670, 670-671 
measure rule, targets, 677-678 
non-busted performance, 676-677 
number found, 673 
performance over time, 676, 676 
price, 671, 679 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 673 
rising/falling volume, 675 
short stocks, lows, 679 
size statistics, 675 
spike height performance, 679 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 673 
statistics, 672-677, 673 
stops, 675, 678 
threat assessment, 678 
trades, 677, 677-681 
trend change, 673-674, 678 
turning point, pipe bottom 
representation, 672 
twin peaks, 669 
visibility, 670 
volume, 675, 675 
yearly position, performance, 674 
How many change trend, 1198 
How to Make Money in Stocks (O’Neil), 
295, 544 
Hudson Global (HSON), rounding 
bottoms, 851, 851-852 
Hughes Supply Inc. (HUG), 129, 414, 
528, 623 


I 
IBM (IBM), complex head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, 606 
Identification guidelines 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
381, 381-384, 460-463, 462 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
400-403, 402, 478, 478-481 
Ascending broadening wedge, 179, 
179-181 
ascending inverted scallops, 890, 
890-891 
ascending scallops, 873-874, 874 
ascending triangles, 978-980, 979 
bearish AB=CD, 29, 29-31 
bearish bat, 46, 46-47 
bearish butterfly, 247, 247-249 


1258 


Index 


Identification guidelines (Continued) 

bearish crab, 279-281, 280 

bearish Gartley, 570-572, 572 

bearish Wolfe wave, 1166-1168, 1167 

big M, 62, 62-63 

big W, 79, 79-80 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 
210-212, 211 

broadening bottoms/tops, 97, 97-100, 
156-158, 157 

bullish AB=CD, 38-39 

bullish bat, 54, 54-56 

bullish butterfly, 257, 257-258 

bullish crab, 288, 288-289 

bullish Gartley, 979, 579-581 

bullish Wolfe wave, 1176, 1176-1177 

cloudbanks, 265, 265-267 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 604, 604-606, 639-641, 640 

cup with handle, 296-298, 298 

descending broadening wedge, 
194-196, 195 

descending inverted scallops, 923-925, 
924 

descending scallops, 905-906, 906 

descending triangles, 1000-1002, 1001 

diamond bottoms/tops, 328-331, 329, 
346-349, 347 

diving board, 364-366, 365 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
421-424, 423, 496-497, 497 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
440-443, 441, 512, 512-515 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1091, 
1091-1093, 1120, 1120-1122 

falling wedges, 1133-1135, 1134 

flags, 528-530, 539 

gaps, 557-560, 558 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
588, 588-590, 621, 621-623 

high and tight flags, 544-545, 545 

horn bottoms/tops, 655, 655-656, 670, 
670-671 

inverted cup with handle, 313, 
313-314 

inverted roof, 827, 827-829 

island reversals, 684-686, 685 

measured move down, 701, 701-704 

measured move up, 715-717, 717 


pennants, 728-730, 729 
pipe bottoms/tops, 745, 745-747, 
761-762, 762 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 775-777, 776, 
795, 795-796 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 117-119, 118 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 136, 136-138 
rising wedges, 1150-1152, 1151 
roof, 813, 813-814 
rounding bottoms/tops, 841, 841-843, 
857-859, 858 
symmetrical triangles, 1022, 
1022-1024 
three falling peaks, 938, 938-940 
three peaks and domed house, 
953-959, 954 
three rising valleys, 962-964, 963 
top bump-and-run reversal, 229-232, 
230 
triple bottoms/tops, 1042-1044, 1043, 
1059, 1059-1062 
V-bottoms/tops, 1077, 1077-1078, 
1106, 1106-1107 
Inco Limited (N), descending scallops, 
919 
Inco Ltd (N), bottom bump-and-run 
reversal, 217 
Incyte Corp (INCY), bearish Wolfe 
wave, 1165 
Infinera Corp. INFN), diamond 
bottoms, 331 
Inner head and shoulders, 612-613, 640 
Insteel Industries (IIIN), high and tight 
flags, 552 
Interactive Brokers Group (IBKR), 
bearish Gartley, 569 
Interactive Brokers Group Inc (IBKR), 
bearish Wolfe wave, 1169 
Interest rates (Federal Reserve), 666, 
1063, 1136 
Intermediate pattern, 1209 
Intermediate-term downward, rectangle 
bottoms, 775 
Intermediate-term downward trend, 
reversal, 194 
Internal partial decline/rise, 1204-1205, 
1205 


International Flavors and Fragrances 
(IFF), rectangle tops, 797 
Intraformation trade, 128, 147 
Intuit Inc INTU), bearish Gartley, 573 
Invacare Corp (IVC), Adam & Eve 
double tops, 492 
Inverted BARR, 209 
Inverted cup with handle, 311, 312, 314 
average decline, 317 
breakouts, 311, 314, 375, 318, 379, 
320-321 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 321 
busted patterns/trades, 321, 322, 323 
close short, 323 
companies, analysis, 312, 313, 315, 
316, 324 
confirmation, 314 
cumulative failure rates, 318 
days to ultimate low, 317 
dome-shaped volume, 312 
down-sloping trendline, sell trigger, 
324 
failures, 314, 316-317, 321, 321 
gaps, 319 
head-and-shoulders, 323 
height, 319-320 
identification guidelines, 313, 313-314 
measured move down, 323 
measure rule, targets, 322-323 
non-busted performance, 322 
number found, 317 
open short, 323 
performance over time, 321, 321 
price support, 316 
pullbacks, 318 
retrace, 314 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 317 
rims, 314, 315 
rising/falling volume, 320 
rounded cup, 314 
size statistics, 319 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 317 
statistics, 317, 317-322 
stops, 320, 323 
trades, 322, 322-325 
trend change, 318 
trendline, 323 


Index 1259 


volume, 320, 320 

V-shape, 313 

width, 320 

yearly position, performance, 318 


Inverted roof, 825-827 


average decline/rise, 830 

breakouts, 825, 828, 831, 832, 833-834 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 833 

busted patterns/trades, 835, 835, 836 

companies, analysis, 826, 828, 829, 837 

continuation pattern, 828 

cumulative failure rates, 831 

days to ultimate high, 831 

days to ultimate low, 831 

failures, 829-830, 834, 834-835 

gaps, 832 

height, 832, 833 

identification guidelines, 827, 
827-829 

launch price, stock return, 837 

measure rule, targets, 835 

non-busted performance, 835 

number found, 830 

performance over time, 834, 834 

price trend, 828 

pullbacks, 831 

quick decline/rise, 836 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 830 

reversal/continuation performance, 
830 

rising/falling volume, 833 

size statistics, 833 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 830 

statistics, 830, 830-835 

stops, 834, 836 

symmetry, 828 

throwbacks, 831 

trades, 835-838, 836 

trend change, 831 

upward price trend, failure, 829 

volume, 828, 833 

width, 832 

yearly position, performance, 831 


Investment footprints, 3 
iShares U.S. Basic Materials ETF ([YM), 


head-and-shoulders tops, 632-633 


Island bottoms, 683, 684, 685, 687, 696 


1260 Index 


Island reversals, 682-684, 687 
average decline/rise, 688-689 
breakouts, 686, 690, 690, 692-693 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 693 

busted patterns, 694, 694 

chart pattern, 495 

companies, analysis, 684, 685, 687, 
696 

cumulative failure rates, 689 

days to ultimate high, 689 

days to ultimate low, 689 

duration, 685, 686 

failures, 686-688, 693, 694 

height, 692 

identification guidelines, 684-686, 
685 

island bottoms/tops, 682, 683 

measure rule, targets, 695-696 

non-busted performance, 694 

number found, 688 

one-day reversal, 684 

performance over time, 693, 693 

prices, 684-686, 696 

pullbacks, 691 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 688 

rising/fallin volume, 692 

size statistics, 691 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 
689 

statistics, 688, 688-694 

stops, hit frequency, 693 

throwbacks, 691 

trades, 694-698, 695, 696 

trend change, 689 

trendline, 687, 696-697 

volume, 686, 692, 692 

width, 692 

yearly position, performance, 691 

Island tops, 683, 684, 687 


J 

JDS Uniphase Corp (DSU), inverted 
cup with handle, 313 

JLG Industries (LG), ascending 
scallops, 885 

Johnson & Johnson (JNJ), descending 
triangles, 1015 


K 

Kaufman and Broad (KBH), symmetrical 
triangles, 1021 

KB Home Corp (KBH), Adam & Adam 
double bottoms, 394-395 

Kellogg Co (kK), 248, 775 

Kenneth Cole Productions (KCP), 
ascending triangles, 992 

Knots, 18-20, 490, 523, 650, 1205 

Kulicke and Soffa (KLIC), descending 
triangles, 1013 


L 

Labor Ready (LRW), rectangle tops, 808 

Lamar Advertising (LAMR), bottom 
fishing, 10 

Launch prices, 72, 649, 837, 1121, 1205 

Launch time, big W, 90 

Lead-in height, 231, 1205 

Lead-in phase, 231, 717 

Light breakout day volume, heavy 
breakout day volume (contrast), 
24, 25 

Limit order, 1206 

Linear regression, 1206 

Liz Claiborne (LIZ), 850, 940 

Location, 1200 

Long pattern, 1209 

Long stop, 109, 169 

Long-term downtrend, retrace 
(pipe tops), 763 

Long-term uptrends, 770, 889 

Lower bottoms/tops, 394, 433-434, 453, 
472,491, 505, 524 

Lower spike, horn bottoms, 664 

Lowes, earnings report, 471 


M 
MagneTek, Inc (MAG), 237, 1017 
Manpower, Inc (MAN), three falling 
peaks, 940 
Market trend, usage, 393, 412, 433, 452, 
471, 489, 505, 522 
Maximum price rise/decline, 1206 
McDermott International (MDR), island 
reversals, 687 
Measured move down (MMD), 699-702 
average length, 706 
average success rate, 706 


bull markets, success over time, 706 

channels, display, 703 

chart pattern, 455 

companies, analysis, 700, 702, 704, 
709, 709-711, 711 

corrective phase, 702, 708, 711 

experience, 708-711 

failures, focus, 704—705 

first leg, 702 

flags, pennants (pattern comparison), 
702-704 

identification guidelines, 701, 701-704 

inverted cup with handle, 323 

measure rule, 708 

nested measured move, 700 

number found, 705 

patterns, avoidance, 702 

performance, 706 

price, stopping point (location), 707 

results, 699 

rising/falling volume, 706-707 

second leg, 702, 704 

statistics, 705, 705-707 

trades, 708, 708, 709, 711-712 

trendline, slope, 700 

volume, 706, 706 

Measured move up (MMU), 713-716, 
716 

average length, 718-719 

average success rate, 719 

breakaway gap, close, 721 

bull markets, success over time, 720 

companies, analysis, 714, 716, 717, 
720, 721, 723 

experience, 722-723 

failures, 717, 717-718 

first leg, 715, 715-716 

identification guidelines, 715, 715-717 

measure rule, 720-722 

number found, 718 

patterns, avoidance, 716-717 

performance, 719 

price, stopping point (location), 720 

results, 713 

rising/falling volume, 719-720 

second leg, 715, 715-716 

Standard Products (SPD), 723 

statistics, 718, 718-720 

stock purchase, 722 


1261 


Index 


support/resistance, 722 

symmetrical triangle, 721 

trades, 719, 719, 724-725 

volume, 719, 719 

Measure rule, 1206 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 
219-220 

broadening bottoms, 107-108 

complex head-and-shoulders tops, 
648-649 

Eve & Eve double tops, 521-522 

flags, 536-538 

measured move down, 708 

measured move up, 720-722 

pennants, 7326 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 126-127 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 145-146 

rounding tops, 867 

top bump-and-run reversal, 240-241 

usage, 741, 1013 

Measure rule, targets 

Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
391, 393, 469-470 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
410-412, 488-489 

ascending broadening wedge, 187-188 

ascending inverted scallops, 899-900 

ascending scallops, 882-884 

ascending triangles, 988-990 

big M, 71-72 

big W, 88 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms, 
611-612 

cup with handle, 305 

descending broadening wedge, 
203-204 

descending inverted scallops, 932 

descending scallops, 916 

descending triangles, 1012-1013 

diamond bottoms, 338-339 

diving board, 371-372 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
431, 433, 503-504 

Eve & Eve double bottoms, 45 1-452 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1099-1100, 
1128 

falling wedges, 1143-1144 


1262 Index 


Measure rule, targets (Continued) 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
596-598, 629-630 
high and tight flags, 551 
horn bottoms/tops, 662, 677-678 
inverted cup with handle, 322-323 
inverted roof, 835 
island reversals, 695-696 
pipe bottoms, 753-754 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 786-787, 
804-805 
rising wedges, 1160-1161 
roof, 822-823 
rounding bottoms, 849-850 
symmetrical triangles, 1033-1035 
three falling peaks, 947-948 
three rising valleys, 970 
triple bottoms/tops, 1051-1052, 
1070-1071 
V-bottoms, 1085, 1115 
Median, 1206 
Median breakout distance to apex, 1199 
Median height as a percentage of 
breakout price, 1200 
Median width, 1200 
Mental stop, 1206 
Mentor Graphics (MENT), cup with 
handle, 297 
Merck and Co, Inc (MRK&), ascending 
inverted scallops, 889 
Merrill Lynch and Company (MER), 
891, 925 
Michaels Stores (MIK), 631, 665, 
665-666, 892 
Micron Technology (MU), top bump- 
and-run reversal, 237 
Millennium Pharmaceuticals (MLNM), 
853, 1145 
Mini-bump-and-run reversal, 717 
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing 
(MMM), 642, 1023 
Minor high, 1206 
Minor low, 1206 
Move stop, broadening bottoms, 109 
Move up pattern, formation, 480 
Moving average convergence/divergence 
(MACD), 4, 6-7, 506, 1037 
Moving average crossover system, 6—7 
Multiple touches, 1134-1135, 1151 


Multipliers, 539, 737 
Murphy Oil Corp (MUR), 299, 537 
N 
Nabors Industries, Ltd (NBR), extended 
V-bottoms, 1102 
Narrow pattern, 22, 23, 1206 
Narrow pattern performance, 1200 
NASDAQ, 455, 666 
National Fuel Gas (NFG), 149-150, 860, 
993-994 
National Semiconductor Corp (NSM), 
843, 893 
Near horizontal neckline, complex 
head-and-shoulders bottoms, 605 
Neckline, 1206 
complex head-and-shoulders tops, 641 
down-sloping neckline, head-and- 
shoulders tops, 620 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
589, 597, 622-623 
highest high/neckline, difference 
computation, 649 
horizontal neckline (complex head- 
and-shoulders bottom), 602 
near horizontal neckline, complex 
head-and-shoulders bottoms, 605 
price, subtraction (head-and-shoulders 
tops), 630 
pullback, head-and-shoulders tops, 
619 
slope, 598, 613, 651 
steepness, head-and-shoulders tops, 
634 
Nested measured move, 700 
Newport Corporation (NEWP), Adam 
& Adam double tops, 462 
Noble Corporation (NE), Adam & Adam 
double bottoms, 392 
Noble Energy Inc. (NBL), Adam & 
Adam double tops, 474 
No gap, breakout day gap (contrast), 23, 
23 
Non-busted performance, 1201 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
391, 469 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
410, 488 
ascending broadening wedge, 187 


ascending inverted scallops, 899 
ascending scallops, 882 
ascending triangles, 988 
big M, 70 
big W, 87 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 219 
broadening bottoms/tops, 107, 
166-167 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 611, 647 
cup with handle, 304 
descending broadening wedge, 
202-203 
descending inverted scallops, 93 1-932 
descending scallops, 915 
descending triangles, 1011 
diamond bottoms/tops, 337-338, 
354-355 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
431, 503 
Eve & Eve double tops, 520-521 
falling wedges, 1142 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
596, 629 
horn bottoms/tops, 662, 676-677 
inverted cup with handle, 322 
inverted roof, 835 
island reversals, 694 
pipe bottoms/tops, 753, 768 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 785, 804 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 126 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 145 
rising wedges, 1160 
roof, 821 
symmetrical triangles, 1033 
three falling peaks, 947 
three rising valleys, 970 
top bump-and-run reversal, 240 
triple bottoms/tops, 1051, 1069 
V-bottoms/tops, 1084, 1114 
Non-Fibonacci-based patterns, 246, 251, 
255, 286-287 
Northwest Pipe Co. (NWPX), 272-273, 
807, 1037, 1086 
Number found, 1198 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
386, 464 


1263 


Index 


Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
405, 483 

area gaps, 560 

ascending broadening wedge, 182 

ascending inverted scallops, 894 

ascending scallops, 876 

ascending triangles, 983 

bearish AB=CD, 32 

bearish bat, 49 

bearish butterfly, 251 

bearish crab, 282 

bearish Gartley, 574 

bearish Wolfe wave, 1170 

big M, 65 

big W, 81 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 214 

breakaway gaps, 561 

broadening bottoms/tops, 101, 160 

bullish AB=CD, 40 

bullish bat, 57 

bullish butterfly, 260 

bullish crab, 290 

bullish Gartley, 582 

bullish Wolfe wave, 1179 

cloudbanks, 268 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 607, 643 

descending broadening wedge, 197 

descending inverted scallops, 926 

descending scallops, 909 

descending triangles, 1004 

diamond bottoms/tops, 333, 350 

diving board, 367 

Eve & Adam double tops, 499 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
445-446, 516 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1094, 1123 

falling wedges, 1137 

flags, 532 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
592, 624 

high and tight flags, 547 

horn bottoms/tops, 658, 673 

inverted cup with handle, 317 

inverted roof, 830 

island reversals, 688 

measured move down, 705 

measured move up, 718 

pennants, 732 


1264 Index 


Number found (Continued) 
pipe bottoms/tops, 748, 764 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 779, 798 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 139-140 
rising wedges, 1154 
roof, 816 
rounding bottoms/tops, 844, 861 
symmetrical triangles, 1027 
three falling peaks, 942 
three rising valleys, 965 
top bump-and-run reversal, 233 
triple bottoms/tops, 1045, 1064 
V-bottoms/tops, 1079, 1108 
NYSE/NASDAQ exchanges, stock 
trades, 4 


O 

Occurrence line, 24 

On Assignment, Inc (ASGN), bearish 
Wolfe wave, 1167 

On-balance volume (OBV), 506 

One-day reversal (ODR), 472, 684 

O’Neil, William J., 294-296, 544-545 

One-winning trade, extended V-bottoms, 
1100 

Opening gap, 560 

Open short, inverted cup with handle, 323 

Orthodox broadening tops, 158 

Outfont Media (OUT), diving board 
gap, 13 

Overhead resistance, 93, 740, 860, 893, 
908, 1026, 1055 

Overshoot, 1206, 1210 


P 
Pacific Scientific (PSX), measured move 
up, 721 
Pacific Telesis Group (PAC), descending 
broadening formation, 138 
Park Electrochemical (PKE), ascending 
triangles, 992 
Parker Drilling Co (PKD), right-angled 
ascending broadening formation 
(support/resistance areas), 118 
Partial decline/rise, 1204-1207, 1205 
ascending broadening wedge, 188 
broadening bottoms/tops, 109-110, 
170 


descending broadening wedge, 204 
failure, 1205, 1207 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 128-129 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 137, 147-148 
Pattern, 557, 702-704, 925, 1201, 
1203-1204 
Pattern end, price move 
bearish AB=CD, 33 
bearish bat, 50 
bearish butterfly, 252 
bearish crab, 283 
bearish Gartley, 574 
bullish AB=CD, 41 
bullish bat, 58 
bullish butterfly, 261 
bullish crab, 292 
bullish Gartley, 583 
Patternz, 16, 94 
Paychex Inc (PAYX), bearish bat, 48f 
Paypal Holdings, Inc. (PYPL), bullish 
bat (upward breakout), 53 
Pennants, 726-728, 738 
adverse breakout, sale, 740 
average decline/rise, 733 
breakouts, 726-727, 730, 733, 733, 
735-737 
bull markets, performance over time, 
736 
companies, analysis, 728-731, 
738-741, 739, 741 
converging trendlines, 728 
days to trend high, 733 
days to trend low, 733 
downward price trend, 730 
downward slope, 729 
duration, 730 
experience, 738-741 
failures, focus, 731 
flagpole, 728-729 
flags, pattern comparison, 702-704 
gaps, 734 
height, 734, 735 
identification guidelines, 728-730, 729 
measure rule, 736, 741 
multipliers, 737 
number found, 732 
overhead resistance, search, 740 


price, 728-729, 729, 731, 741 
reversal/continuation performance, 
732 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
performance, 732 
rising/falling volume, 735-736 
size statistics, 734 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 733 
statistics, 732, 732-736 
symmetrical triangle, 731 
tilt, 737 
time move, 737 
trades, 736, 736-738, 739, 741-742 
underlying support, search, 740 
uptrend, 729 
usage, 284 
volume, 729, 735, 735 
width, 735 
yearly position, performance, 734 
Percentage meeting price target, 1198, 
1207 
Percentage price resumes trend, 1199 
Perfect trade, execution, 6 
Performance, 1184-1189, 1197, 1207 
bearish Wolfe wave, 1171 
board length, contrast, 374 
bullish Wolfe wave, 1180 
contests, 21-26 
line, 22 
measured move down, 706 
measured move up, 719 
plunge depth, contrast, 373-374 
Up/Down volume, 33 
Performance of breakouts, 1199 
Performance over time 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
390, 390, 469, 486 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
409, 409, 487, 487 
ascending broadening wedge, 186, 
186 
ascending inverted scallops, 898, 898 
ascending scallops, 881, 881 
ascending triangles, 987, 988 
bearish Wolfe wave, 1171 
big M, 69, 69 
big W, 86, 87 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 218, 
219 


Index 1265 


broadening bottoms/tops, 106, 106, 
166, 166 

bullish Wolfe wave, 1181 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 610, 611, 646, 647 

cup with handle, 303, 304 

descending broadening wedge, 201, 
202 

descending inverted scallops, 931, 931 

descending scallops, 913, 914 

descending triangles, 1010, 1011 

diamond bottoms/tops, 336, 337, 354, 
355 

diving board, 371, 371 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
430, 430, 502, 503 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 449, 
450, 520, 520 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1098, 1098, 
1128, 1128 

falling wedges, 1141, 1142 

flags, 536 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
595, 595, 628, 628 

high and tight flags, 550, 551 

horn bottoms/tops, 660, 661, 676, 676 

inverted cup with handle, 321, 321 

inverted roof, 834, 834 

island reversals, 693, 693 

pipe bottoms/tops, 752, 752, 767, 
768 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 784, 784, 803, 
803 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 125 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 144, 144 

rising wedges, 1158, 1158 

roof, 820, 820 

rounding bottoms/tops, 848, 848, 866, 
866 

symmetrical triangles, 1031, 1032 

three falling peaks, 946, 946 

three rising valleys, 968, 969 

top bump-and-run reversal, 238, 239 

triple bottoms/tops, 1050, 1050, 1068, 
1068 

V-bottoms/tops, 1083, 1084, 1114, 
1114 


1266 


Index 


Performance with breakout day gap, 
1199 
Performance without breakout day gap, 
1199 
Performing pattern, 1189, 1190 
Pfizer (PFE), ascending triangles, 994 
Phillips Petroleum, 472 
Phillips Van Heusen (PVH), Adam & 
Adam double tops, 464 
Pinnacle West Capital Corp. (PNW), 
head-and-shoulders tops, 63 1-632, 
632 
Pipe bottoms, 743-745, 754 
5% failure, 747 
average rise, 749 
breakouts, 747, 750, 750-752 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 752 
busted patterns, 752, 752-753 
chart patterns, confirmation, 755 
companies, analysis, 744, 746, 747, 
755-757, 758 
confirmation, 747, 754 
cumulative failure rate, 749 
days to ultimate high, 749 
downtrend, pipe formation, 744 
downward adjacent spikes, 745 
downward trend, 754 
experience, 755-757 
failures, 747, 747-748, 752, 752 
identification guidelines, 745, 745-747 
low retest, 758 
measure rule, targets, 753-754 
non-busted performance, 753 
number found, 748 
obviousness, 747 
overlap, 746 
performance over time, 752, 752 
post-breakout statistics, 750 
representation, 672 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 748 
rising/falling volume, 751 
sale, consideration, 757 
short-term swing trades, 756 
size statistics, 751 
spikes, 746 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 749 
statistics, 748-753, 749 


stock purchase, 754 
stops, 751, 754-755, 757 
trades, 753, 753-755, 757-759 
trend change, 749-750 
uptrend retrace, pipe formation, 744 
upward breakouts, 743 
volume, 746, 750, 751 
weekly chart, 744, 745, 746 
Pipe tops, 760-762, 770, 771 
average decline, 765 
breakouts, 760, 762, 764, 766, 766, 767 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 768 
busted patterns, 768, 768 
companies, analysis, 761, 763, 764, 771 
confirmation, 762 
cumulative failure rates, 766 
days to ultimate low, 765 
downward trend, 769 
failures, 763-764, 768, 768 
formation, 764 
identification guidelines, 761-762, 762 
knots, 770 
long-term downtrend, retrace, 763 
long-term uptrends, 770 
measure rule, targets, 769 
non-busted performance, 768 
number found, 764 
performance over time, 767, 768 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 764 
rise-retrace pattern, 771 
rising/falling volume, 767 
size statistics, 766 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 765 
statistics, 764-768, 765 
stops, 767, 770 
symmetrical triangle, 764 
trades, 769, 769-772 
trend change, 765 
uptrend retrace, 770 
upward adjacent spikes, 762 
volume, 762, 767, 767 
weekly chart/scale, 761, 762, 763 
yearly position, performance, 766—767 
Plunge, 366, 373-374, 1077-1078, 1092, 
1207 
Position trader, 1207 
Post-breakout statistics, 1199 


Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
388, 466 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
407, 485 

ascending broadening wedge, 184 

ascending inverted scallops, 896 

ascending scallops, 878 

ascending triangles, 985 

big M, 67 

big W, 83 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 216 

broadening statistics, 103 

broadening tops, 163 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 609, 645 

cup with handle, 301 

descending broadening wedge, 199 

descending inverted scallops, 928 

descending scallops, 911 

descending triangles, 1007 

diamond bottoms, 335 

diamond tops, 352 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
428, 500 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 447, 
517 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1096, 1125 

falling wedges, 1139 

flags, 534 

head-and-shoulders bottoms, 593, 626 

high and tight flags, 548 

horn bottoms/tops, 659, 674 

inverted cup with handle, 319 

inverted roof, 832 

island reversals, 690 

pennants, 733 

pipe bottoms/tops, 750, 766 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 781, 800 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 123 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 141 

rising wedges, 1156 

roof, 817 

rounding bottoms/tops, 846, 864 

three falling peaks, 944 

three rising valleys, 967 

top bump-and-run reversal, 236 

triple bottoms/tops, 1047, 1065 


Index 1267 


V-bottoms/tops, 1081, 1111 
Pothole setup, 14-16, 15 
PPL Corporation (PPL), bearish Wolfe 
wave, 1173 
Premature breakout, 977, 980, 1207 
Price 
difference, 664-665, 679 
downturn, 31 
drop, failure, 704 
fall, prediction (rising wedges), 1162 
level, attainment, 33-34 
maximum price rise/decline, 1206 
mirrors, usage, 696 
move, 33, 539, 699, 737 
rise, 402, 591, 991, 1021, 1178 
spikes, horn tops, 671 
support, inverted cup with handle, 316 
target, 990, 1175 
upward breakout, pennants, 731 
Price trend 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
381-382, 461 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
401, 478, 481 
ascending scallops, 873 
big M, 63 
broadening bottoms/tops, 98, 156 
declining price trend, descending 
scallops, 905 
descending inverted scallops, 923 
descending scallops, 906 
diamond bottoms/tops, 329, 346 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
423, 496 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 440, 
512-513 
flags, 530 
inverted roof, 828 
island reversals, 684-686 
pennants, 728-729 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 776-777, 795 
three falling peaks, 938 
three rising valleys, 963 
triple bottoms/tops, 1042-1044, 1061 
Price turn, frequency, 34, 41, 251, 261, 
283, 291, 575 
Principal Financial Group (PFG), 723 
Proctor & Gamble (PG), ascending 
triangles, 992 


1268 


Index 


Profit-taking, impact, 296 
Proportional, term (meaning), 704 
Proxy, single busted patterns (contrast), 
26, 26 
Public Service Enterprise Group (PEG), 
Adam & Eve double bottoms, 
413-414 
Puget Sound Energy (PSD), rectangle 
bottoms, 788-790, 789 
Pullbacks, 1198, 1205, 1208 
Adam & Adam double tops, 466-467 
Adam & Eve double tops, 485 
ascending broadening wedge, 183-184 
ascending scallops, 879 
ascending triangles, 985 
average rise/decline for patterns 
without throwbacks/pullbacks, 1199 
average rise/decline for patterns with 
throwbacks/pullbacks, 1199 
average time to throwback/pullback 
ends, 1199 
average time to throwback/pullback 
peaks, 1199 
big M, 66-67 
broadening bottoms/tops, 103-104, 
162 
complex head-and-shoulders tops, 
644-645 
descending broadening wedge, 
199-200 
descending inverted scallops, 928-929 
descending scallops, 912 
descending triangles, 999, 1008 
diamond bottoms/tops, 334, 351-352 
Eve & Adam double tops, 501 
Eve & Eve double tops, 518 
extended V-tops, 1126 
falling wedges, 1140 
head-and-shoulders tops, 626 
inverted cup with handle, 318 
inverted roof, 831 
island reversals, 691 
occurrence, 1199 
performance, 23 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 781-782, 787, 
799-800 
result, triple tops, 1058 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 116, 122-124 


right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 142 

rising wedges, 1155-1156 

roof, 818 

rounding tops, 863 

setups, 18-29 

swing trading pullbacks, 18 

symmetrical triangles, 1029 

three falling peaks, 944 

throwbacks, contrast, 24 

top bump-and-run reversal, 235-236 

trade, big M, 73 

trading methods, 18 

triple tops, 1065 

V-tops, 1111-1112 

wait, triple tops, 1071 

Pulte Homes (PHM), ascending inverted 

scallops, 893 


Q 

Questar Corp. (STR), symmetrical 
triangles, 1037 

Quick decline/fall/rise, 339, 836 

Quick trade, V-bottoms, 1086 


R 
Ralph Lauren Corp. (RL), bearish bat, 
45 


Receding volume trend, descending 
triangles, 1000 
Rectangle bottoms, 773-776, 788 

average decline/rise, 779 

breakouts, 773-774, 775, 777, 780, 
781, 783-784, 787 

busted patterns/trades, 785, 785, 
787-788 

companies, analysis, 775, 776, 778, 
788-790, 789, 790 

cumulative failure rates, 780 

days to ultimate high, 779 

days to ultimate low, 779 

descending triangle, creation, 775 

downward price trend, 778 

duration, 777 

experience, 788-790 

failure, 777-778, 778, 784, 784 

formation height, computation, 790 

gaps, 782 

height, 782, 783 


horizontal trendlines, 777 

identification guidelines, 775-777, 776 

intermediate-term downtrend, 775 

measure rule, 786-787, 790 

non-busted performance, 785 

number found, 779 

performance over time, 784, 784 

price trend, 776-777 

pullbacks, 781-782, 787 

retrace, 776 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 779 

rising/falling volume, 783 

size statistics, 782 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 779 

statistics, 778-785, 779 

stops, 784, 787 

tall rectangle scalp, 787 

throwbacks, 781-782, 787 

touches, 777 

trades, 785-788, 786, 789, 790-791 

trend change, 780 

volume, 777, 783, 783 

width, 782 

yearly position, performance, 780 

Rectangle tops, 792-795, 806 

5% failure, 797 

average decline/rise, 798 

breakaway gaps, 809 

breakouts, 792-793, 794, 796, 799, 
800, 802 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 803 

busted patterns/trades, 803, 803-806 

companies, analysis, 794, 796, 797, 
806-809, 809 

cumulative failure rates, 799 

days to ultimate high, 798 

days to ultimate low, 798 

duration, 796 

exhaustion gaps, 809 

experience, 806-809 

failures, 797-798, 803, 803 

gaps, 800 

height, 801 

horizontal trendlines, 795 

identification guidelines, 795, 795-796 

measure rule, targets, 804-805 

non-busted performance, 804 


1269 


Index 


number found, 798 

performance over time, 803, 803 

price trend, 795 

pullbacks, 799-800 

receding volume trend, 796 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 798 

rising/falling volume, 803 

size statistics, 801 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 798 

statistics, 798, 798-804 

stops, 802, 805 

tall rectangle scalp, 805 

throwbacks, 799-800 

touches, 795 

trades, 804, 804-806, 809-810 

trend change, 799 

volume, 796, 802, 802 

width, 801 

yearly position, performance, 799 


Retrace, ascending inverted scallops, 


890-891 


Reversal (R), 1197, 1208 


continuation (C), contrast, 21, 21 

failure, complex head-and-shoulders 
tops, 642 

five-point reversal, 96 

one-day reversal, island reversals, 684 

pattern, Adam & Eve double bottoms, 
401 

triple tops, weekly scale, 1061 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) 


occurrence, 1198 
Adam & Adam double bottoms, 386 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
405, 483 
ascending broadening wedge, 182 
ascending inverted scallops, 894 
ascending scallops, 876 
ascending triangles, 983 
big M, 65 
big W, 82 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 214 
broadening bottoms/tops, 101, 161 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 607, 643 
cup with handle, 300 
descending broadening wedge, 197 
descending inverted scallops, 926 


1270 


Index 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) (Continued) 


descending scallops, 909 

descending triangles, 1004 

diamond bottoms/tops, 333, 367 

diving board, 367 

Eve & Adam double tops, 499 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 446, 
516 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1094, 1123 

falling wedges, 1137 

flags, 533 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
592, 624 

high and tight flags, 547 

horn bottoms/tops, 658, 673 

inverted cup with handle, 317 

inverted roof, 830 

island reversals, 688 

pipe bottoms/tops, 748, 764 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 779, 798 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 121 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 140 

rising wedges, 1154 

roof, 816 

rounding bottoms/tops, 844, 861 

symmetrical triangles, 1027 

three falling peaks, 942 

three rising valleys, 965 

top bump-and-run reversal, 233 

triple bottoms/tops, 1045, 1064 

V-bottoms/tops, 1079, 1109 

Reversal/continuation performance 

Adam & Adam double tops, 465 

ascending broadening wedge, 182 

ascending inverted scallops, 894 

ascending scallops, 876 

ascending triangles, 983 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 214 

descending broadening wedge, 198 

descending inverted scallops, 926 

descending scallops, 909 

descending triangles, 1004 

diving board, 368 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1094, 1123 

falling wedges, 1137 

flags, 533 

inverted cup with handle, 317 


inverted roof, 830 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 121 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 140 

rising wedges, 1154 

roof, 816 

rounding bottoms/tops, 844, 861-862 

symmetrical triangles, 1027 

three falling peaks, 943 

three rising valleys, 965 

top bump-and-run reversal, 234 

V-bottoms/tops, 1080, 1109 


Reversal (R), continuation (C) 


performance, 732, 1198 


R.G. Barry (RGB), descending triangles, 


1016 


Right-angled ascending broadening 


formation, 114-118 

average decline/rise, 121 

breakouts, 114-115, 119, 122, 123, 125 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over times, 126 

busted patterns/trades, 125, 126, 126, 
128-129 

companies, analysis, 115, 116, 118, 
120, 128, 129-131 

cumulative failure rates, 123 

days to ultimate high, 122 

days to ultimate low, 122 

experience, 129-131 

failures, 119-121, 125, 126 

formations, number, 121 

gaps, 124 

height, 124 

horizontal base/up-sloping trendline, 
115 

horizontal bottom support line, 
118-119 

identification guidelines, 117-119, 118 

intraformation trade, 128 

measure rule, 126-127 

non-busted performance, 126 

partial decline/rise, 127-128 

performance over time, 125, 126 

price targets, 128 

pullback, 116, 122-124 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 121 


reversal/continuation performance, 
121 

rising/falling volume, 124 

size statistics, 124 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 122 

statistics, 127, 121-126 

stops, 125, 128 

support/resistance, 118, 119 

throwbacks, 122-124 

touches, 119 

trades, 126-129, 127, 131 

trends, change, 122 

volume, 119, 124, 125 

whitespace, 119 

width, 124 

yearly position, performance, 122 

Right-angled descending broadening 

formation, 132-136 

average decline/rise, 140 

breakouts, 132, 134, 137, 138, 141, 
142-144, 146, 147 

broadening top, 139 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 144 

busted patterns, 144, 145, 148 

companies, analysis, 133-135, 
137-139, 147, 148-151 

cumulative failure rates, 141 

days to ultimate high, 140 

days to ultimate low, 140 

down-sloping trendline, 137 

experience, 148-151 

failures, 138-139, 144, 144 

gaps, 142 

height, 142-143 

horizontal top resistance line, 137 

horizontal trendline/down-sloping 
trendline, 133 

identification guidelines, 136, 
136-138 

intraformation trading, 147 

left broadening pattern, trendline 
rebound, 135 

measure rule, 145-146 

non-busted performance, 145 

number found, 139-140 

partial decline/rise, 137, 147-148 

performance over time, 144, 144 

pullbacks, 142 


Index 1271 


reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 140 
reversal/continuation performance, 
140 
rising/falling volume, 143 
size statistics, 142 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 140 
statistics, 139-145, 140 
stops, 143, 146-147 
support/resistance, 138 
throwbacks, 142 
touches, 137 
trades, 145-148, 146, 151-152 
trend change, 140-141 
volume, 138, 143, 143 
whitespace, 137 
width, 143 
yearly position, performance, 142 
Right low support, rounding tops, 868 
Right rim, height (ascending scallops), 
887 
Right top, price decline, 463, 479, 497, 
513 
Rim, inverted cup with handle, 314 
Rise-retrace move, V-tops, 1108 
Rise-retrace pattern, pipe tops, 771 
Rising/falling volume 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
390, 468 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
408, 487 
ascending broadening wedge, 185 
ascending inverted scallops, 898 
ascending scallops, 880 
ascending triangles, 987 
big M, 68 
big W, 85-86 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 
217-218 
broadening bottoms/tops, 105, 165 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 610, 646 
cup with handle, 302 
descending inverted scallops, 930 
descending scallops, 912 
descending triangles, 1010 
diamond bottoms/tops, 335-336, 
353 
diving board, 370 


1272 Index 


Rising/falling volume (Continued) duration, 1152 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, failures, 1152-1153, 1158, 1159 
430, 502 gaps, 1156 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 449, height, 1157 
519 identification guidelines, 1150, 
extended V-bottoms/tops, 1098, 1127 1150-1152 
falling wedges, 1141 measure rule, 1160-1161, 1161 
flags, 534, 536 multiple touches, 1151 
head-and-shoulders bottoms, 595 non-busted performance, 1160 
high and tight flags, 549 number found, 1154 
horn bottoms/tops, 660, 675 performance over time, 1158, 1158 
inverted cup with handle, 320 prices, 1152, 1162 
inverted roof, 833 profit taking, 1161 
island reversals, 692 pullbacks, 1155-1156 
measured move down, 706-707 reversal (R), continuation (C) 
measured move up, 719-720 occurrence, 1154 
pennants, 735-736 reversal/continuation performance, 
pipe bottoms/tops, 751, 767 1154 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 783, 802 rising/falling volume, 1158 
right-angled ascending broadening rounding tops, 870 
formation, 124 size statistics, 1157 
right-angled descending broadening Standard & Poor's 500 change, 1154 
formation, 143 statistics, 1153, 1153-1160 
rising wedges, 1158 symmetrical triangle, downward 
roof, 819 breakout, 1161 
rounding tops, 865 throwbacks, 1155-1156 
symmetrical triangles, 1031 trades, 1160, 1160-1163 
three falling peaks, 945-946 trend change, 1154-1155 
three rising valleys, 968 trendline touches, 1151 
top bump-and-run reversal, 238 up-sloping trendlines, 1149 
trend performance, 1200 upward sloping volume trend, 1149 
triple bottoms, 1049 volume, 1151-1152, 1158, 1158 
V-bottoms/tops, 1083, 1113 whitespace, 1151 
Rising volume, falling volume (contrast), width, 1147 
24, 24 yearly position, performance, 1155 
Rising wedges, 1148-1151 Risk/reward, diamond tops, 356-357 
5% failure, 1152 Robert Hall International (RHD, big M, 
apex distance, 1155 63 
average decline/rise, 1154 Rohm and Haas (ROH), triple bottoms, 
breakouts, 1148-1149, 1152, 1155, 1055 
1156, 1158, 1161 Roof, 811-813 
bull markets, performance/failures average decline/rise, 816 
over time, 1158 breakouts, 811, 814, 815, 816, 817, 
busted patterns, 1159, 1159-1162 819-820 
companies, analysis, 1149, 1151, 1152, bull markets, performance/failures 
1161, 1162 over time, 820 
cumulative failure rates, 1155 busted patterns, 820, 821, 821 
days to ultimate high, 1154 companies, analysis, 812, 814, 815, 823 


days to ultimate low, 1154 cumulative failure rates, 817 


days to ultimate high, 816 

days to ultimate low, 816 

duration, 814 

failures, 814-815, 820, 820 

gain, dividends (inclusion), 823 

gaps, 818 

head-and-shoulders top, relationship, 
814 

height, 819 

horizontal trendline, 814 


identification guidelines, 813, 813-814 


measure rule, targets, 821-822 
non-busted performance, 821 
number found, 816 
pattern, downward price trend, 812 
performance over time, 820, 820 
pullbacks, 818 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 816 
reversal/continuation performance, 
816 
rising/falling volume, 819 
size statistics, 818 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 816 
statistics, 815, 815-821 
stops, 820, 822 
throwbacks, 818 
trades, 821-824, 822 
trend change, 816 
trendline touches, 814 
volume, 814, 819, 819 
width, 819 
yearly position, performance, 817 
Rounded bump, top bump-and-run 
reversal, 231-232 
Rounded cup, inverted cup with handle, 
314 
Rounded turn, left rim (location diffi- 
culty), 851 
Rounding bottoms, 839-841 
average rise, 844 
breakouts, 839, 843, 845-846, 846, 
848, 850 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 848 
companies, analysis, 840, 842, 843, 
850, 851, 851-853, 853 
confirmation, 843 
cumulative failure rates, 845 


Index 1273 


daily scale, 840 

days to ultimate high, 845 

dead-cat bounce, 850 

double bottom pattern, 853 

experience, 850-853 

failures, 843-844, 848, 948 

gaps, 846 

handles, 842, 850 

height, 846, 847 

identification guidelines, 841, 841-843 

left rim, absence, 850 

measure rule, targets, 849-850 

number found, 844 

performance over time, 848, 848 

purchase, 850 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 844 

reversal/continuation performance, 
844 

rising/falling volume, 848 

rounded turn, left rim (location 
difficulty), 851 

scale, 841-842 

size statistics, 847 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 845 

statistics, 844, 844-849 

stops, hit frequency, 848 

throwbacks, 846 

trades, 849, 849-850, 853-854 

trend, 843, 845 

volume, 842, 847, 847 

weekly scale, 842 

width, 847 

yearly position, performance, 846 


Rounding tops, 855-858 


30% retrace, purchase, 867-868 

average decline/rise, 862 

breakouts, 855, 856, 858, 859, 860, 
863, 864, 865 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 866 

companies, analysis, 857, 858, 860, 
868-869, 870 

cumulative failure rates, 863 

curve, irregularity, 857 

daily scale, 858 

days to ultimate high, 862 

days to ultimate low, 862 

even end price, 859 


1274 Index 


Rounding tops (Continued) 
experience, 868-869 
failures, 859-860, 866, 866 
gaps, 863 
height, 864, 865 
identification guidelines, 857-859, 858 
measure rule, 867 
number found, 861 
performance over time, 866, 866 
pullbacks, 863 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 861 
reversal/continuation performance, 
861-862 
right low support, 868 
rising/falling volume, 865 
rising wedge, 870 
size statistics, 865 
Standard & Poor's 500 change, 862 
statistics, 861, 861-866 
throwbacks, 863 
trades, 867, 867-870 
trend change, 862 
U-shaped volume, 858 
volume, 857, 859, 865, 866 
weekly scale, 858 
width, 865 
yearly position, performance, 863 
Rowan Companies (RDC), cup with 
handle, 307-308 
Rowan Company (RDC), rounding tops, 
868-869 


Shelby Williams Industries, Inc (SY), 
rectangle bottoms, 790 
Short pattern, 22, 22, 1200, 1208-1209 
Short sale, risk (extended V-tops), 
1128-1129 
Short stocks, low (horn tops), 679 
Short stop, 109, 170 
Short term, 1209 
Short-term downward price trend, 527 
Short-term swing trades, pipe bottoms, 
756 
Shoulder highs, complex head-and- 
shoulders tops, 651 
Shoulder lows, 598, 613 
Shoulder troughs (head-and-shoulders 
bottoms), 598 
Simple moving average (SMA), 267, 271, 
274, 275, 276 
Single bust, 1208 
Single busted patterns, 26, 26, 1201 
Single-diagonal configurations/two- 
diagonal configurations (diagonal 
diamonds), 340 
Single-diagonal diamond, 332 
Single-diagonal pattern, 341, 357-359 
Single/double/triple+ bust count, 1201 
Single-head patterns, 639 
Size statistics 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
389, 467 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
408, 486 
ascending broadening wedge, 185 


S ascending inverted scallops, 897 
Same-store sales (SSS), increase, 415 ascending scallops, 879 
Sara Lee Corp. (SLE), big W, 92 ascending triangles, 986 


Sara Lee (SLE), triple bottoms, big M, 68 
1054-1055 big W, 85 

Scotts Miracle-Gro Co. (SMG), bullish bottom bump-and-run reversal, 218 
crab, 290 broadening bottoms/tops, 104, 164 


Second leg, 700, 702, 704, 714 

Sell lines, top bump-and-run reversal, 
241-242 

Sell order placement, 540 

Sell signal, three falling peaks, 951 

Sell trendlines, stock sale opportunity, 
474 

Series height/width, ascending inverted 
scallops, 901 


complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 610, 646 

cup with handle, 302 

descending broadening wedge, 200 

descending inverted scallops, 929 

descending scallops, 913 

descending triangles, 1009 

diamond bottoms/tops, 336, 353 

diving board, 369 


Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
429, SOL 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 448, 
518 
extended V-bottoms/tops, 1097, 1126 
falling wedges, 1140 
flags, 535 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
594, 627 
high and tight flags, 549 
horn bottoms/tops, 661, 675 
inverted cup with handle, 319 
inverted roof, 833 
island reversals, 691 
pennants, 734 
pipe bottoms/tops, 751, 766 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 782, 801 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 124 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 142 
rising wedges, 1157 
roof, 818 
rounding bottoms/tops, 847, 865 
symmetrical triangles, 1031 
three falling peaks, 945 
three rising valleys, 967 
top bump-and-run reversal, 238 
triple bottoms/tops, 1048, 1066 
V-bottoms/tops, 1082, 1112 
Smart money, 619 
Smith International (SID), 461, 1062 
Smooth top, 890, 923 
Southern Copper (SCCO), bullish 
AB=CD (price decline), 39 
Southwest Airlines (LUV), 110-111, 150, 
172-173, 396, 1015-1016 
Spansion (SPSN), pipe bottoms, 757 
Spike height performance, 664, 679 
Stair-step pattern, complex head-and- 
shoulders tops, 637 
Standard Microsystems Corp. (SMSC), 
complex head-and-shoulders tops, 
649 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 1198, 1208 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
386, 465 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
405, 484 


Index 1275 


ascending broadening wedge, 182 

ascending inverted scallops, 894-895 

ascending scallops, 877 

ascending triangles, 984 

big M, 65 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 214 

broadening bottoms/tops, 102, 161 

cloudbanks, 269 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 607, 643 

cup with handle, 300 

descending broadening wedge, 198 

descending inverted scallops, 926 

descending scallops, 910 

descending triangles, 1005 

diamond bottoms/tops, 333, 
350-351 

diving board, 368 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
427,499 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 446, 
516 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1094-1095, 
1124 

falling wedges, 1137 

flags, 533 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
592, 625 

high and tight flags, 547 

horn bottoms/tops, 658, 673 

inverted cup with handle, 317 

inverted roof, 830 

island reversals, 689 

pennants, 733 

pipe bottoms/tops, 749, 765 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 779, 798 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 122 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 140 

rising wedges, 1154 

roof, 816 

rounding bottoms/tops, 845, 862 

symmetrical triangles, 1028 

three falling peaks, 943 

three rising valleys, 965 

top bump-and-run reversal, 234 

triple bottoms/tops, 1046, 1064 

V-bottoms/tops, 1080, 1109 


1276 Index 


Standard & Poor’s 500 index, relative 
strength (relationship), 130 
Standard & Poor’s index, 499, 658, 733 
Standard Products (SPD), measured 
move up, 723 
Statistics, 815, 815-821, 1198 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
386, 386-391, 464, 464-469 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
405, 405-410, 484, 560-561 
area gaps, 360, 560-561 
ascending broadening wedge, 182, 
182-187 
ascending inverted scallops, 894, 
894-899 
ascending scallops, 876, 876-882 
ascending triangles, 983, 983-988 
bearish AB=CD, 32, 32-33 
bearish bat, 48, 49 
bearish butterfly, 249, 251 
bearish crab, 282-283, 283 
bearish Gartley, 572, 574 
bearish Wolfe wave, 1170, 1170-1172 
big M, 65, 65-70 
big W, 81-87, 82 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 214, 
214-219 
breakaway gaps, 561, 561-562 
breakout statistics, 1199 
broadening bottoms, 101, 101-107 
bullish AB=CD, 40, 40-41 
bullish bat, 57, 57 
bullish butterfly, 260, 260-261 
bullish crab, 290-291, 291 
bullish Gartley, 587, 582 
bullish Wolfe wave, 1179, 1179-1181 
cloudbanks, 268, 268-270 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 607, 607-611, 643, 643-647 
continuation gaps, 562, 562 
cup with handle, 299-304, 300 
descending broadening wedge, 197, 
197-203 
descending inverted scallops, 926, 
926-932 
descending scallops, 909, 909-915 
descending triangles, 1004-1011, 1005 
diamond bottoms/tops, 333, 333-338, 
350-355, 351 


diving board, 367, 367-371 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
426, 426-431, 499, 499-503 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 445, 
445-450, 516, 516-521 

exhaustion gaps, 563, 563 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1094, 
1094-1099, 1123, 1123-1128 

falling wedges, 1137, 1137-1142 

flags, 532, 532-536 

gaps, 560-563 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
592, 592-596, 624, 624-629 

high and tight flags, 546-551, 547 

horn bottoms/tops, 658, 658-662, 
672-677, 673 

inverted cup with handle, 317, 
317-322 

inverted roof, 830, 830-835 

island reversals, 688, 688-694 

measured move down, 705, 705-707 

measured move up, 718, 718-720 

pennants, 732, 732-736 

pipe bottoms/tops, 748-753, 749, 
764-768, 765 

post-breakout statistics, 1199 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 778-785, 779, 
798, 798-804 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 121, 121-126 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 139-145, 140 

rising wedges, 1153, 1153-1160 

rounding bottoms/tops, 844, 844-849, 
861, 861-866 

size statistics, 1200 

summary, 1184-1196 

symmetrical triangles, 1027, 
1027-1033 

three falling peaks, 942, 942-947 

three rising valleys, 965, 965-970 

top bump-and-run reversal, 233-240, 
234 

triple bottoms/tops, 1045-1051, 1046, 
1063, 1063-1069 

V-bottoms/tops, 1079, 1079-1084, 
1108-1114, 1109 

volume statistics, 1200 


Steelcase (SCS), 18, 723 


Stein Mart (SMRT), rounding bottoms, 
853 
Stocks, patterns, 934, 974, 1062, 1088 
Stop, 6, 519, 934, 1208 
Stop location 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
393,471 
Adam & Eve double tops, 490 
ascending inverted scallops, 901 
ascending scallops, 884 
ascending triangles, 991 
broadening bottoms/tops, 110, 170 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 613, 650 
descending scallops, 916-917 
descending triangles, 1014 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
433, 505 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 453, 
522 
high and tight flags, 552 
horn bottoms/tops, 663, 678 
inverted cup with handle, 323 
inverted roof, 836 
pipe bottoms/tops, 754-755, 770 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 787, 805 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 128 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 146-147 
roof, 822 
three rising valleys, 971 
triple bottoms/tops, 1052, 1072 
Stop-loss order, 86, 285, 757, 1207, 
1208 
Stops, hit frequency, 1200 
Adam & Adam double tops, 468 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
409, 487 
ascending inverted scallops, 898 
ascending scallops, 881 
ascending triangles, 987 
big M, 69 
big W, 86 
broadening bottoms/tops, 106, 166 
cup with handle, 303 
descending inverted scallops, 931 
descending scallops, 914 
descending triangles, 1010 


Index 1277 


diving board, 370 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
430, 502 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 449, 
519 
high and tight flags, 550 
horn bottoms/tops, 661, 675 
inverted cup with handle, 320 
inverted roof, 834 
island reversals, 693 
pipe bottoms/tops, 751, 767 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 784, 802 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 125 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 143 
roof, 820 
three falling peaks, 946 
three rising valleys, 969 
triple bottoms/tops, 1049, 1067 
Support, 995, 1003, 1014 
Support and resistance (SAR), 92 
areas, 118, 173 
ascending triangles, 990-991 
diamond tops, 346-349 
display, 113, 133, 316 
levels, determination, 146-147 
location, 75 
measured move up, 722 
right-angled and ascending broaden- 
ing formation, 119 
right-angled and descending broaden- 
ing formation, 138 
search, 900, 933 
Swift Transportation Co. (SWIFT), big 
W, 93 
Swing trade, 17, 51, 1173 
Swing trader, 1208 
Swing trading, 18, 20 
Symmetrical triangles, 721, 1019-1022 
5% failure, 1026 
apex distance, 1029 
apex turning, 1035 
average decline/rise, 1027 
breakouts, 1019, 1020, 1023, 1024, 
1029, 1030, 1031, 1034, 1035, 1038, 
1161 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1032 


1278 


Index 


Symmetrical triangles (Continued) 

busted patterns, 1032, 1033, 1033, 
1035 

commodity channel index (CCI), 
1037 

companies, analysis, 1021, 1024-1026, 
1035-1038, 1038 

cumulative failure rates, 1028 

days to ultimate high, 1028 

days to ultimate low, 1028 

dead-cat bounce, 1023 

double busts, 1024 

duration, 1023-1024 

experience, 1035-1038 

failures, 1025-1027, 1032, 1032 

gaps, 1029 

height, 1029, 1030 

identification guidelines, 1022, 
1022-1024 

measure rule, 1033-1035, 1038 

moving average convergence/ 
divergence (MACD), 1037 

non-busted performance, 1033 

number found, 1027 

overhead resistance, 1026 

pennants, 731 

performance over time, 1031, 1032 

pipe tops, 764 

price rise, 1021 

pullbacks, 1029 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 1027 

reversal/continuation performance, 
1027 

rising/falling volume, 1031 

size statistics, 1031 

Standard & Poor's 500 change, 1028 

statistics, 1027, 1027-1033 

three rising valleys, 974 

throwbacks, 1029 

touches, 1022 

trades, 1033-1035, 1034, 1038-1039 

trend change, 1028-1029 

trendlines, 1025, 1026 

triple busts, 1024 

triple top, 1026 

value investor perspective, 1021 

volume, 1022, 1031, 1032 

whitespace, 1022, 1023, 1025 


width, 1029 
yearly position, performance, 1029 
Symmetry, 589, 605, 622, 639, 641, 828 


Tall, meaning, 660 
Tall pattern, 22, 22, 1200, 1208-1209 
‘Tall rectangle scalp, 787, 805 
‘Tandy Corporation (TAN), 654, 870 
TD Ameritrade Inc. (AMTD), sym- 
metrical triangles, 1035-1036 
‘Telxon Corp (TLXN), cup with handle, 
306 
‘Tenet Healthcare Corp. (THC), horn 
bottoms, 656 
‘Tenneco Inc (TEN), triple tops, 1058 
‘Teradyne Inc. (TER), 91, 330 
‘Term, 1209 
‘Tesoro Petroleum (TSO), 546, 723, 923, 
1025 
‘Texas Industries (TXI), descending 
broadening wedge, 205-206 
‘Texas Pharmaceutical Industries 
(TEVA), Adam & Adam double 
tops, 459 
‘Textron (T), ascending triangles, 994 
Thor Industries Inc. (THO), complex 
head-and-shoulders tops, 638 
Threat assessment, horn tops, 678 
Three falling peaks, 936-938 
average decline, 943 
breakouts, 939-940, 944, 944-946 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 946 
busted patterns, 947, 947, 949 
companies, analysis, 937, 939-941, 
949, 951 
confirmation line/wait, 939, 949 
cumulative failure rates, 943 
days to ultimate low, 943 
downward breakouts, 936 
early entry, 948 
experience, 949-950 
failures, 940-942, 946, 946 
gaps, 945 
height, 945 
identification guidelines, 938, 938-940 
measure rule, targets, 947-948 
non-busted performance, 947 


number found, 942 

performance over time, 946, 946 

price trend, 938 

proportion, 938-939 

pullbacks, 944 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 942 

reversal/continuation performance, 
943 

rising/falling volume, 945-946 

sale, problem, 950 

sell signal, 951 

size statistics, 945 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 943 

statistics, 942, 942-947 

stops, hit frequency, 946 

trades, 941, 943-944, 947-949, 948, 
951 

trendline, price piercing, 951 

trend peak, continuation, 937 

underlying support, 948 

volume, 945, 946 

width, 945 

yearly position, performance, 944 

Three-leg zigzag pattern, 27 

Three peaks and domed house, 952-953, 
956-959 

appearance, prediction, 958 

display, 953, 957 

DJ 30 Industrials (DJD, 955-958 

identification guidelines, 953-959, 954 

price sharing, absence, 956 

separating decline, completion, 955 


Index 1279 


early entry, 971 

experience, 971-973 

failures, 964, 969, 969 

gaps, 966-967 

height, 967-968 

identification guidelines, 962-964, 963 

measure rule, targets, 970 

non-busted performance, 970 

number found, 965 

opening price sale, 973 

performance over time, 968, 969 

price trend, 963 

proportion, 963-964 

result, problem, 972 

reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 965 

reversal/continuation performance, 
965 

rising/falling volume, 968 

size statistics, 967 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 965 

statistics, 965, 965-970 

stock sale, 974 

stops, 969, 971, 973 

symmetrical triangle, 974 

throwbacks, 966 

trades, 970, 970-971, 974-975 

trend change, 965-966 

trendline break, 971 

upward price trend, 962 

volume, 968, 968 

width, 968 

yearly position, performance, 966 


up-and-down moves, 955 
variations, absence, 955 
Three rising valleys, 960, 962 


Three-valley pattern, 585 
Throwbacks, 19-20, 1198, 1205, 1205 
Adam & Adam double bottoms, 388 


average rise, 965 

breakouts, 960, 964, 966, 967, 968 

bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 969 

busted patterns, 969, 969, 970 

companies, analysis, 961-963, 971- 
973, 972, 974 

confirmation, 964, 971 

cumulative failure rates, 966 

days to ultimate high, 965 

display, 961 

divergence, technical indication, 974 

downward price trend, 963 


Adam & Eve double bottoms, 407 

ascending broadening wedge, 183-184 

ascending inverted scallops, 896 

ascending scallops, 879 

ascending triangles, 985 

average rise/decline for patterns 
without throwbacks/pullbacks, 1199 

average rise/decline for patterns with 
throwbacks/pullbacks, 1199 

average time to throwback/pullback 
ends, 1199 

average time to throwback/pullback 
peaks, 1199 


1280 Index 


Throwbacks (Continued) ‘Tootsie Roll Industries Inc (TR), rising 
big W, 84 wedges, 1162 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, ‘Top bump-and-run reversal (top BARR), 
215-216 227-230 
broadening bottoms/tops, 103-104, arithmetic scale, 230 
162 average decline, 234 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms, breakouts, 227, 232, 235, 236, 238 
608-609, 613 bull markets, performance/failures 
descending broadening wedge, over time, 239 
199-200 bump-and-run reversal, weekly chart, 
descending inverted scallops, 233 
928-929 busted occurrence, 239 
descending scallops, 912 busted patterns, 239, 239, 240 
descending triangles, 1008 companies, analysis, 229, 233, 237, 
diamond bottoms/tops, 334, 351-352 241, 243 
Eve & Adam double bottoms, 428 cumulative failure rates, 235 
Eve & Eve double bottoms, 447 days to ultimate low, 234 
extended V-bottoms, 1096-1097 downhill run, 232 
falling wedges, 1140 dual bumps, 232, 236 
head-and-shoulders bottoms, 594, 598 failures, 232-233, 239, 239 
high and tight flags, 548-549 gaps, 236 
horn bottoms, 667 height, 236, 238 
inverted roof, 831 identification guidelines, 229-232, 230 
island reversals, 691 lead-in phase/height, 231 
occurrence, 301, 1199 measure rule, 240-241 
performance, 23 non-busted performance, 240 
pullbacks, contrast, 24 number found, 233 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 781-782, 787, parallel warning/sell lines, 241 
799-800 performance over time, 238, 239 
right-angled ascending broadening pointed-looking first bump, 237 
formation, 122-124 pullbacks, 235-236 
right-angled descending broadening reversal (R), continuation (C) 
formation, 142 occurrence, 233 
rising wedges, 1155-1156 reversal/continuation performance, 
roof, 818 234 
rounding bottoms/tops, 846, 863 rising/falling volume, 238 
setups, 20 rounded bump, 231-232, 237 
symmetrical triangles, 1029 sell lines/price, 241-242, 243 
three rising valleys, 966 size statistics, 238 
triple bottoms, 1047-1048 Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 234 
V-bottoms, 1081-1082 statistics, 233-240, 234 
Tilt, pennants tilt, 737 trades, 240, 240-244 
‘Time move, 538-539, 737 trend change, 234-235 
‘Titan Corp (T'TN), rectangle bottoms, trendline, 229, 230-231, 241 
776 volume statistics/trend, 238, 239 
‘Titanium Metals Corp. (TIE), descend- warning lines, 241-242 
ing scallops, 918-919 width, 238 
Toll Brothers (TOL), head-and- yearly position, performance, 235 


shoulders tops, 619, 620 Top high price, 461, 478, 482, 497, 513 


‘Top separation, 463, 478-479, 482, 497, 
513 
‘Top-to-top variation, 471, 491, 505, 523 
‘Toshchakovy, Igor R., 339, 341, 357, 359 
‘Touches 
ascending broadening wedge, 180 
broadening bottoms/tops, 98, 157 
descending broadening wedge, 
195-196 
multiple touches, 1134-1135, 1151 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 777, 795 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 119 
symmetrical triangles, 1022 
trendline touches, roof, 814 
‘Toys R Us (TOY), head-and-shoulders 
tops, 622 
Trades, 5, 8, 35, 393, 679, 737 
‘Trading, avoidance (roof), 823 
Trading Classic Chart Patterns 


(Bulkowski), 17, 170, 415, 473, 614, 


755, 788, 892 
‘Trading tactics, 1201 

Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
391-394, 392, 469, 469-472 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
410-413, 411, 488-491, 489 

ascending broadening wedge, 187, 
187-188 

ascending inverted scallops, 899-901, 
900 

ascending scallops, 882-884, 883 

ascending triangles, 988-991, 989 

bearish AB=CD, 33-34 

bearish bat, 49-50 

bearish butterfly, 251-252 

bearish Gartley, 574-575 

bearish Wolfe wave, 1172, 1172 

big M, 71, 71-74 

big W, 88, 88-90 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 
219-221, 220 

broadening bottoms/tops, 107-110, 
108, 167-170, 168 

bullish AB=CD, 41-42 

bullish bat, 57-58 

bullish butterfly, 261 

bullish crab, 291-292 

bullish Gartley, 582-583 


Index 1281 


bullish Wolfe wave, 1181, 1181-1182 

cloudbanks, 270-272, 271 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 611-613, 612, 648, 648-651 

cup with handle, 304-307, 305 

descending broadening wedge, 203, 
203-204 

descending inverted scallops, 932-934, 
933 

descending scallops, 915, 915-917 

descending triangles, 1012, 1012-1014 

diamond bottoms/tops, 338, 338-342, 
355-360, 356 

diving board, 371-373, 372 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
43 1-434, 432, 503-505, 504 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 457, 
451-453, 521, 521-524 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1099, 
1099-1100, 1128-1129, 1129 

falling wedges, 1143, 1143-1144 

flags, 536-539, 537 

gaps, 563-566, 564 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
596-598, 597, 629, 629-631 

high and tight flags, 557, 551-552 

horn bottoms/tops, 662-665, 663, 677, 
677-679 

inverted cup with handle, 322, 
322-323 

inverted roof, 835-836, 836 

island reversals, 694-697, 695 

measured move down, 708, 708 

measured move up, 720-722, 721 

pennants, 736, 736-738 

pipe bottoms/tops, 753, 753-755, 769, 
769-770 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 785-788, 786, 
804, 804-806 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 126-129, 127 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 145-148, 146 

rising wedges, 1160, 1160-1162 

roof, 821-823, 822 

rounding bottoms/tops, 849, 849-850, 
867, 867-868 

symmetrical triangles, 1033-1035, 
1034 


1282 


Index 


‘Trading tactics (Continued) 
three falling peaks, 947-949, 948 
three rising valleys, 970, 970-971 
top bump-and-run reversal, 240, 
240-242 
triple bottoms/tops, 1051, 1051-1052, 
1069-1072, 1070 
V-bottoms/tops, 1085-1086, 1086, 
1115, 1115-1116 
‘Trendlines 
ascending broadening wedge, 180 
ascending triangles, 979 
break, three rising valleys, 971 
broadening bottoms/tops, 98, 156-157 
converging trendlines, 728 
cup with handle, 392 
descending broadening wedge, 195 
descending triangles, 1001 
down-sloping trendline, right-angled 
descending broadening formation, 
137 
horizontal trendlines, 777, 795 
increase (top bump-and-run reversal), 
230-231 
inverted cup with handle, 323 
observation, island reversals, 696-697 
piercing, ascending inverted scallops, 
901 
price close, island reversals, 687 
price piercing, three falling peaks, 951 
slope, measured move down, 700 
touches, 814, 991, 1026, 1134, 1151 
trading, 1052, 1071 
up-sloping trendline, 115, 119, 176 
Trend low, 1209 
‘Trends, 843, 917, 1209 
Trend start, 1209 
‘Triarc Cos, Inc. A (TRY), inverted cup 
with handle, 316 
Triple bottoms, 1040-1042 
Adam & Eve double bottom (AEDB), 
1054 
average rise, 1046 
Big W chart pattern, reversal portion, 
1041 
breakouts, 1040, 1044, 1046, 1047, 
1049-1050 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1050 


busted patterns, 1050, 1050, 1051 
companies, analysis, 1043, 1052-1055 
confirmation, 1044, 1052 
cumulative failure rates, 1047 
days to ultimate high, 1046 
experience, 1052-1055 
failures, 1044-1045, 1045, 1050, 1050 
gaps, 1048 
height, 1048, 1049 
identification guidelines, 1042-1044, 
1043 
measure rule, targets, 1051-1052 
non-busted performance, 1051 
number found, 1045 
overhead resistance, penetration 
(inability), 1055 
performance over time, 1050, 1050 
price, 1042-1044 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 1045 
rising/falling volume, 1049 
size statistics, 1048 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 1046 
statistics, 1045-1051, 1046 
stops, 1049, 1052 
throwbacks, 1047-1048 
trade, 1051-1052, 1052, 1055-1056 
trend change, 1046 
trendline, trading, 1052 
troughs, 1043 
upward run, failure, 1045 
volume, 1044, 1049, 1049 
width, 1048 
yearly position, performance, 
1046-1047 
‘Triple+ bust, 1209 
‘Triple busted complex head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, money loss, 614 
Triple busted pattern, 1203 
Triple busts, symmetrical triangles, 1024 
Triple tops, 1057-1060 
5% failure, 1062 
average decline, 1064 
breakouts, 1057, 1061-1062, 1065, 
1065 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1068 
busted patterns/trades, 1068, 1068, 
1069, 1072 


bust frequency, 1203 


companies, analysis, 1058, 1060-1062, 


1069, 1071, 1072-1073 


confirmation, 1058, 1061-1062, 1071, 


1071 
cumulative failure rates, 1064 
days to ultimate low, 1064 
descending scallop, 1071 
experience, 1072-1073 
failures, 1062-1063, 1068, 1068 
gaps, 1066 
head-and-shoulder top, formation, 
1058 
height, 1066 
identification guidelines, 1059, 
1059-1062 
measure rule, targets, 1070-1071 
non-busted performance, 1069 
number found, 1064 
performance over time, 1068, 
1068 
price trend, 1061 
problem, 1069 
pullbacks, 1058, 1065, 1071 
reversal (R), continuation (C) 
occurrence, 1064 
reversal, weekly scale, 1062 
size statistics, 1066 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 
1064 
statistics, 1063, 1063-1069 
stock turnaround, 1062 
stops, 1067, 1072 
symmetrical triangles, 1026 
trades, 1069-1074, 1070 
trend change, 1064-1065 
trendline, trading, 1071 
unconfirmed double bottom, 1071 
volume, 1062, 1066, 1067 
width, 1066 
yearly position, performance, 1065 
‘Troughs, triple bottoms, 1043 
‘Twin-peak pattern, 459, 479, 508, 514 
‘Twin peaks, horn top appearance, 637, 
669 
‘Two-diagonal diamond, 327, 330, 331 


‘Two-diagonal pattern, 341-342, 359-360 


‘Two-losing trade, extended V-bottoms, 
1100 


Index 1283 


U 
UAL Corp. (UAL), complex head-and- 
shoulders tops, 642 
Ugly patterns, 571 
Ultimate high, 5, 5-6, 1198, 1204, 1207, 
1209 
Ultimate low, 5, 6-7, 1198, 1203, 1209 
Unconfirmed double bottom, triple tops, 
1071 
Underlying support, 740, 948 
Undershoot, 1209, 1210 
United Technology (UTX), descending 
broadening wedge, 196 
Unocal Corp (UCL), complex head-and- 
shoulders bottoms, 602 
Uphill run, volume (bottom bump-and- 
run reversal), 212 
Up-sloping sell trendline, Adam & Adam 
double bottoms, 392 
Up-sloping support line, ascending 
triangles, 991 
Up-sloping top trendline, right-angled 
ascending broadening formation, 
119 
Up-sloping trendline, 115, 176, 977, 990, 
1149 
Up-tilting flag, 538 
Up trend (cup with handle), 296 
Uptrend retrace, 744, 770 
Uptrends, 662-663 
Upward adjacent spikes, pipe tops, 762 
Upward breakouts, 38 
Adam & Adam double bottoms, 379 
Adam & Eve double bottoms, 398 
ascending broadening wedge, 175 
ascending inverted scallops, 888 
ascending scallops, 871, 875 
ascending triangles, 976, 982 
big W, 77, 81 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 208 
broadening bottoms/tops, 95, 153 
bullish Wolfe wave, 1174 
cloudbanks, 263 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 601, 606, 642 
cup with handle, 294 
descending broadening wedge, 192 
descending inverted scallops, 921 
descending scallops, 903 


1284 


Index 


Upward breakouts (Continued) 
descending triangles, 997 
diamond bottoms/tops, 326, 344 
diving board, 362 
Eve & Adam double bottoms, 419 
Eve & Eve double bottoms, 438 
extended V-bottoms, 1089 
failure, head-and-shoulders bottoms, 
590 
falling wedges, 1131 
flags, 526 
head-and-shoulders bottoms, 585 
high and tight flags, 542 
horn bottoms, 653 
inverted roof, 825 
island bottoms, 683 
overhead resistance (diamond 
bottoms), 332 
pennants, 726 
pipe bottoms, 743 
price rise, extended V-bottoms, 1093 
rarity, extended V-tops, 1122 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 773, 775, 792 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 114 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 132 
rising wedges, 1148 
roof, 811, 815 
rounding bottoms/tops, 839, 855, 858 
symmetrical triangles, 1019 
three rising valleys, 960 
triple bottoms, 1040 
V-bottoms, 1075 
Upward gaps, close within a week, 555 
Upward moves, 36, 52, 255, 286, 577 
Upward price breakout, extended V-tops, 
1122 
Upward price trend, 514, 829, 919, 962 
Upward run, failure (triple bottoms), 
1045 
Upward sloping volume trend, rising 
wedges, 1149 
Upward-tilting flag, 538 
USF & G Corp (FG), Adam & Eve 
double tops, 480 
U-shaped cup (cup with handle), 296 
U-shaped pattern, 14, 78 
U-shaped volume, 158, 315, 858 


Vv 
Valaris Plc (VAL), extended V-bottoms, 
1093 
Valero Energy Corp. (VLO), descending 
broadening formation, 134 
Valleys 
Adam & Adam double tops, 461 
Adam & Eve double tops, 478, 482 
bearish AB=CD, 30 
bullish AB=CD, 39 
Eve & Adam double tops, 497 
Eve & Eve double tops, 513 
increase, big W, 90 
performance, reduction (big W), 89 
Varco International, Inc (VRC), sym- 
metrical triangles, 1038 
Varity Corp. (VAT), 135, 223, 225 
V-bottoms, 1075-1077 
average rise, 1080 
breakouts, 1075, 1078, 1081, 1081, 1083 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1083 
busted patterns, 1084, 1084 
buy location, 1085 
chart pattern, 288 
cloudbank level, 1087 
companies, analysis, 1076-1078, 1086, 
1088 
confirmation, 1078 
cumulative failure rates, 1080 
days to ultimate high, 1080 
downward trend, 1077 
duration, 1078 
experience, 1086-1087 
failures, 1078-1079, 1083, 1084 
gaps, 1082 
height, 1082, 1083 
identification guidelines, 1077, 
1077-1078 
measure rule, targets, 1085 
non-busted performance, 1084 
number found, 1079 
performance over time, 1083, 1084 
plunge, 1077-1078 
potential, failure, 1078 
price climb, 1076 
quick trade, 1086 
reversal (R), confirmation (C) 
occurrence, 1079 


reversal/continuation performance, 
1080 

rising/falling volume, 1083 

size statistics, 1082 

Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 1080 

statistics, 1079, 1079-1084 

stock, purchase, 1088 

throwbacks, 1081-1082 

trades, 1085, 1085-1088 

trend change, 1080-1081 

volume, 1078, 1083, 1083 

weekly scale, 1086 

width, 1082 

yearly position, performance, 1081 

Vertex Pharmaceuticals (VRTX), triple 

bottoms, 1053 


1285 


Index 


flags, 535 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
595, 628 

high and tight flags, 550 

horn bottoms/tops, 661, 675 

inverted cup with handle, 320 

inverted roof, 833 

island reversals, 692 

measured move down, 706 

measured move up, 719 

pennants, 735 

pipe bottoms/tops, 751, 767 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 783, 802 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 125 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 143 


Volatility stop, 1210, 1210-1211 
Volume pattern, 528, 620, 638 
Volume performance, 33, 1204 
Volume statistics, 1200 


rising wedges, 1158 
roof, 819 
rounding bottoms/tops, 847, 866 


Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
389, 468 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
409, 486 

ascending broadening wedge, 185 

ascending inverted scallops, 897 

ascending scallops, 880 

ascending triangles, 986 

bearish Wolfe wave, 1171 

big M, 68 

big W, 85 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 218 

broadening bottoms/tops, 105, 165 

bullish Wolfe wave, 1180 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 610, 646 

cup with handle, 303 

descending broadening wedge, 201 

descending inverted scallops, 930 

descending scallops, 913 

descending triangles, 1009 

diamond bottoms/tops, 336, 354 

diving board, 370 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
429, 502 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 449, 
519 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1098, 1127 

falling wedges, 1141 


symmetrical triangles, 1032 
three falling peaks, 946 

three rising valleys, 968 

top bump-and-run reversal, 239 
triple bottoms/tops, 1049, 1067 
V-bottoms/tops, 1083, 1113 


Volume trend, 30-31, 33, 1198, 1200, 


1211 

Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
388, 467 

Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
408, 486 

ascending broadening wedge, 185 

ascending inverted scallops, 898 

ascending scallops, 880 

ascending triangles, 986 

big M, 68 

big W, 85 

bottom bump-and-run reversal, 217 

broadening tops, 165 

bullish AB=CD, 39 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 609, 646 

cup with handle, 302 

descending broadening wedge, 201 

descending inverted scallops, 930 

descending scallops, 912 

descending triangles, 1008 

diamond bottoms, 335 


1286 Index 


Volume trend (Continued) 


diamond tops, 353 

diving board, 370 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
429, 502 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 448, 
519 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1098, 1127 

falling wedges, 1135, 1140 

flags, 534 

head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
595, 627 

high and tight flags, 549 

horn bottoms/tops, 660, 675 

inverted cup with handle, 320 

inverted roof, 833 

island reversals, 692 

measured move down, 706 

measured move up, 719 

pennants, 735 

pipe bottoms/tops, 750, 767 

receding volume trend, rectangle tops, 
796 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 783, 802 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 124 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 142 

rising/falling volume trend perfor- 
mance, 1200 

rising wedges, 1158 

roof, 819 

rounding bottoms/tops, 847, 865 

symmetrical triangles, 1031 

three falling peaks, 945 

three rising valleys, 968 

top bump-and-run reversal, 238 

triple bottoms, 1049 

V-bottoms/tops, 1083, 1113 

Volume trend, performance 

bearish bat, 49 

bearish butterfly, 251 

bearish crab, 283 

bearish Gartley, 574 

bullish AB=CD, 41 

bullish bat, 57 

bullish butterfly, 260-261 

bullish crab, 291 

bullish Gartley, 582 


V-shaped Adam bottom, 421 
V-shaped bowl, ascending scallops, 887 
V-tops, 1105, 1105, 1106, 1116 
average decline, 1109 
breakouts, 1104, 1107, 1110, 1111, 1114 
bull markets, performance/failures 
over time, 1114 
busted patterns/trades, 1114-1116, 
1115, 1117 
chart pattern, formation, 258-259 
companies, analysis, 1105, 1107, 1117 
confirmation, 1107 
cumulative failure rates, 1110 
days to ultimate low, 1109-1110 
duration, 1107 
failures, 1107, 1107-1108, 1114, 1114 
gaps, 1112 
head-and-shoulders top, 1117 
height, 1113 
identification guidelines, 1106, 
1106-1107 
launch price, price return (absence), 
1106 
measure rule, targets, 1115 
non-busted performance, 1114 
number found, 1108 
performance over time, 1114, 1114 
pullbacks, 1111-1112 
reversal (R), confirmation (C) 
occurrence, 1109 
reversal/continuation performance, 
1109 
rise, 1107, 1108 
rising/falling volume, 1113 
size statistics, 1112 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change, 1109 
statistics, 1108-1114, 1109 
trades, 1115, 1115-1117 
trend change, 1110 
volume, 1107, 1113, 1113 
width, 1113 
yearly position, performance, 1111 
Vulcan Materials (VMC), 460, 531 


Ww 

Wal-Mart Stores Inc (WMT), broaden- 
ing top formation, 128 

Warning lines, top bump-and-run 
reversal, 241-242 


Watkins Johnson Co. (WJ), horn 
bottoms, 667 
Wex Inc. (WEX), 633, 807-808 
Whitespace, 1205 
ascending broadening wedge, 180 
broadening bottoms, 98 
descending broadening wedge, 196 
descending triangles, 1003 
excess, avoidance, 99 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 119 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 137 
rising wedges, 1151 
symmetrical triangles, 1022, 1023, 
1025 
Wide pattern, 22, 23, 1200, 1211 
Width 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
389, 467 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
407-408, 486 
ascending broadening wedge, 184 
ascending inverted scallops, 897 
ascending scallops, 874, 880 
ascending triangles, 986 
big M, 67-68 
big W, 85 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 217 
broadening tops, 164 
complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 609, 645 
cup with handle, 302 
descending broadening wedge, 
200-201 
descending inverted scallops, 930 
descending scallops, 912 
descending triangles, 1008 
diamond bottoms/tops, 335, 353 
diving board, 369 
Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
429, 501 
Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 448, 
518 
extended V-bottoms/tops, 1097, 1127 
falling wedges, 1140 
flags, 534 
head-and-shoulders bottoms/tops, 
594, 627 


1287 


Index 


high and tight flags, 549 
inverted cup with handle, 320 
inverted roof, 832 
island reversals, 692 
median width, 1200 
pattern, 22, 23 
pennants, 735 
rectangle bottoms/tops, 782, 801 
right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 124 
right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 143 
rising wedges, 1157 
roof, 819 
rounding bottoms/tops, 847, 865 
symmetrical triangles, 1029 
three falling peaks, 945 
three rising valleys, 968 
top bump-and-run reversal, 238 
triple bottoms/tops, 1048, 1066 
V-bottoms/tops, 1082, 1113 
Williams Companies Inc. (WMB), 374, 
794 
Winn Dixie Stores Inc (WIN), top 
bump-and-run reversal, 243 
Winners, reversals/continuations, 21, 22 
Wolfe, Bill, 1164 
Worst-performing combinations, 
attention, 534 


x 

Xcel Energy, Inc (XEL), bearish crab, 
281 

XL Group (XL), 129-131, 994 


Y 
Yearly position, 1211 
Yearly position, performance 
Adam & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
388, 465 
Adam & Eve double bottoms/tops, 
406-407, 485 
ascending broadening wedge, 183 
ascending inverted scallops, 896 
ascending scallops, 878 
ascending triangles, 984-985 
big M, 66 
big W, 84 
bottom bump-and-run reversal, 215 


1288 


Index 


Yearly position, performance (Continued) 

broadening bottoms/tops, 103, 162 

complex head-and-shoulders bottoms/ 
tops, 608, 644 

cup with handle, 300 

descending inverted scallops, 928 

descending scallops, 912 

descending triangles, 1008 

diamond bottoms/tops, 334, 351 

Eve & Adam double bottoms/tops, 
427-428, 500-501 

Eve & Eve double bottoms/tops, 447, 
518 

extended V-bottoms/tops, 1096, 1125 

falling wedges, 1139 

flags, 533 

head-and-shoulders bottoms, 


pennants, 734 

pipe bottoms/tops, 750, 766-767 

rectangle bottoms/tops, 780, 799 

right-angled ascending broadening 
formation, 122 

right-angled descending broadening 
formation, 142 

rising wedges, 1155 

roof, 817 

rounding bottoms/tops, 846, 863 

symmetrical triangles, 1029 

three falling peaks, 944 

three rising valleys, 966 

top bump-and-run reversal, 235 

triple bottoms/tops, 1046-1047, 1065 

V-bottoms/tops, 1081, 1111 


594, 626 Z 
high and tight flags, 548 Zebra Technologies (ZBRA), bullish 
horn bottoms/tops, 660, 674 AB=CD pattern, 37 
inverted cup with handle, 318 Zilog Inc (ZLG), rectangle tops, 809 
inverted roof, 831 Zurn Industries (ZRN), symmetrical 
island reversals, 691 triangles, 1026 


WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREE- 
MENT 


Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook 
EULA. 


