Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




ThtNfwYofk 

PubtteUbnvy 

OCKER 



b 



/ 



Studies 
In 

Tape 
K^eaaing 



Studies 
In 

Tape 
Reading 



By 

RoUo 

Tape 



C-iS 




I 



Cofyri^t. 1910, 

Reprinted & Published 

BY 

TRADERS PRESS 

P.O. Box 122 Wall St. Station 

New York, N. Y. 10005 








'f 



\ 



'<i 



ft' 



%WOAT\0*^ 



Prinfed in USA, by 

noble offset printers, inc. 

new york 3, n. y. 



Rollo Tape is the colorful nom de plume of one 
of the most astute students in the annals of stock 
market history, Richard D. WyckofF. Mr. WyckofF 
who for many years was publisher of the "Ticker 
Magazine" (the name was later changed to "The 
Magazine of Wall Street") probably contributed 
more to the study of the price movement than any- 
one else in America. 

Of his many books on the stock market "STUD- 
IES IN TAPE READING" remains as his most im- 
portant work. Whether you are a seasoned pro- 
fessional^ or a neophyte to th^ ways of the market, 
the reading of this book cannot fail to be a most 
rewarding experience. Written in part over 50 years 
ago, this classic on the basic laws of the price move- 
ment is invaluable reference to today's market 
operator. 



Contents 



Chapter I. 
Introductory 5 

Chapter II. 
Preliminary Suggestions 20 

Chapter III. 
The Stock List Analyzed 35 

Chapter IV. 
Stop Orders, Trading Rules, Etc 46 

Chapter V. 
Volumes and Their Significance 67 

Chapter VI. 
Market Technique 86 

Chapter VII. 
Dull Markets and Their Opportunities . . . 101 

Chapter VIII. 

The Use of Charts as Guides and Indica- 
tors 115 

Chapter IX. 
Daily Trades vs. Long Pull Operations... 127 

Chapter X. 
Various Examples and Suggestions 141 

Chapter XI. 
Obstacles to be Overcome — Possible Profits 151 

Chapter XII. 

Closing the Trades — Suggestions for Stu- 
dents 161 

Chapter XIII. 
Two Days' Trading 172 

Chapter XIV. 
The Principles Applied to Wider Swings. . 174 



Studies in 1 ape Reading 



Introductory 

THERE is a widespread demand 
for more light on the subject of 
Tape Reading. Thousands of 
those who operate in the stock 
market now recognize the fact that the 
market momentarily indicates its own 
immediate future; tfiat these indications 
are accurately recorded on the tape; 
therefore those who can interpret what 
is imprinted on the narrow paper ribbon 
have a distinct advantage over the gen- 
eral public. 

Such an opinion is warranted, for it is Success of 
well known that many of the most sue- '^•P* ^^e^den 
cessful traders of the present day hegaai 
operations as Tape Readers, trading in 
fractional lots of stock with a capital of 
only a few hundred dollars. 

Speaking of Joe Manning, one of the 
shrewdest and most successful of all the 
traders on the floor of the New Yoijk 
3tock Exchange, a friend of mine once 
said: 



Tape Reading 



Joe Manning 



Mental 
Qualifications 



"Joe and I used to trade in ten share 
lots together. He was an ordinary 
trader, just as I am. We used to hang 
over the same ticker." 

The speaker was, at the time he made 
the remark, still trading in ten-share lots, 
while I happened to know that Joe's bank 
balance — ^his active working capital — 
amounted to $100,000, and tlut this rep- 
resented but a part of the fortune built 
on his ability to interpret the language of 
the tape. 

Why was one of these men able to 
amass a fortune, while the other never 
acquired more than a few thousand dol- 
lars at the same pursuit ? Their chances 
were equal at the start so far as capital 
and opportunity go. The profits were 
there, waiting to be won by either or 
both. 

The answer seems to be in the peculiar 
mental qualifications, highly potent in 
the successful trader, but unpossessed 
by the other. There is, of course, an 
element of luck in every case, but pure 
luck could not be so sustained in Man- 
ning's case as to carry him through oper- 
ations covering a term of years. 

Livermore used to trade solely on 
what the tape told him, closing out every- 
thing before three o'clock. He traded 
from an ofHce and paid the regular com- 
missions, yet three trades out of five 
showed profits. Having made a fortune, 
he invested it in bonds and gave them 
all to his wife. Anticipating the 1907 




Introductory 

panic, he put his $13,000 automobile up 
for a loan of $5,000, and with this cap- 
ital started to play the bear srde, using 
his profits as additional margin. At one 
time he was short 70,000 shares of Union 
Pacific. His whole line was covered on 
one of the panic days, and his net prof- 
its were a million dollars! ^ 

By proper mental equipment we do not 
mean the mere ability to take a loss, de- 
fine the trend, or to execute some other 
move characteristic of the professional 
trader. We refer to the active or dor- 
mant qualities in his make-up; viz., the 
power to drill himself into the right 
mental attitude; to stifle his emotions, 
such as fear, anxiet>', elation, reckless- 
ness ; to train his mind into obedience so 
that it recognizes but one master — the 
tape. These qualities are as vital as 
natural ability, or what is called the sixth 
sense in trading. 

Some people are born musicians, others 
seemingly void of musical taste, develop 
themiselves until they become virtuosos. 
It is the I WILL in a man which makes 
him mediocre or pre-eminent — in Wall 
Street parlance, "a dub" or "a big trader." 

Jacob Field is another exponent of 
Tape Reading. Those who knew Jacob Field 
"Jakey" when he began his Wall Street 
career, noted his ability to read the tape 
and follow the trend. His talent for this 
work was doubtless bom in him; time 
and experience have intensified it. 



Whatever laureb James R. Keene won 

as operator or s^dieate manager^ do not 

Jim Kmnm detract from his reputation as a Tape 

Reader. Hish scrutiny of the tape was so 
intense that he appeared to be in a trance 
while his mental processes were being 
worked out. He seemed to analyze 
prices, volumes and fluctuations down to 
the finest imaginable point. It was then 
his practice to telephone to the floor of 
the Stock Exchange^ ascertain the char- 
acter of the buying or selling, and with 
this auxiliary information complete his 
judgment and make his commitments. 

At his death Mr. Keene stood on the 

Einnacle of fame as a Tape Reader, 
is daily presence at the ticker bearing 
testimony diat the work paid and paid 
wen. 

One might say: 'These are rare ex- 
amples. The average man never makes 
a success of Tape Reading." Right you 
arel The average man sddom makes a 
success of anything. 

Success in this field usually results 
from years of painstaking effort and ab- 
solute concentration upon the subject. 
It requires the devotion of one's whole 
time and attention to the tape. He 
should have no other business or pro- 
fession. ''A man cannot serve two mas- 
ters," and the tape is a tyrant. 
H ^ One cannot become a Tape Reader by 

«J»V giving the ticker absent treatment; nor 

by running into his broker's office after 
lunch, or seeing "how the market closed" 



IntrodiictOfy 

from his evening newspaper. He cannot 
study this art from the far end of a 
telegraph or telephone wire. He should 
spend twenty-seven hours a week at die 
ticker, and many more hours away from 
it studying his mistakes and finding the 
"why" of his losses. 

If Tape Reading were an exact science, 
one would simply have to assemble 
the factors, carry out the operations in- 
dicated, and trade accordingly. But the 
factors influencing the market are in- 
finite in their number and character, as 
well as in their effect upon the market, 
and to attempt the construction of a 
Tape Reading formula would seem to be 
futile. However, something of the kind 
(in the rough) may develop as we pro- 
gress in this investigation, so let us pre- 
serve open minds. 

What is Tape Reading? 

This (question may be best answered by 
first deciding what it is not. 

Tape Reading is not merely looking at What TM>e 
the tape to ascertain how prices are Reading ii 
running. Not 

It is not reading the news and then 
buying or selling ''if the stock acts 
right." 

It is not trading on tips, opinions, or 
information. 

It is not buying "because they are go- 
ing up," or selling "because they look 
weak." 

It is not trading on chart indications 
or by other meclumical methods. 



Tape Reading 

It is not "buying on dips and selling on 
bulges." 

Nor is it any of the hundred other 

foolish things practised by the millions 

of people without method, forethought or 

calculation. 

Tape Reading Tape Reading seems to us : The 

Defined science of determining from the tape the 

immediate trend of prices. 

It is a method of forecasting, from 
what appears on the tape now, what is 
likely to appear in the future. 

Tape Reading is rapid-fire horse sense. 
Its object is to determine whether stocks 
are being accumulated or distributed, 
marked up or down, or whether they are 
neglected by the large interests. The 
Tape Reader aims to make deductions 
from each succeeding transaction — ever>' 
shift of the market kaleidoscope ; to grasp 
a new situation, force it, lightning-like, 
through the weighing machine of the 
brain, and to reach a decision which can 
be acted upon with coolness and pre- 
cision. 

Supply and ^^ ^^ gauging the momentary supply 

Demand and demand in particular stocks and in 

the whole market, comparing the forces 
behind each and their relationship, each 
to the other and to all. 

A Tape Reader is like the manager of 
a department store; into his office are 
poured hundreds of reports of sales 
made by the various departments. He 
notes the general trend of business — 
whether demand is heavy or light 



Introductory 

throughout the store — but lends special 
attention to the lines in which demand is 
abnormally strong or weak. When he 
finds difficulty in keeping his shelves full 
in a certain department, he instructs his 
buyers, and they increase their buying 
orders ; when certain goods do not move 
he knows there is little demand (market) 
for them, therefore, he lowers his prices 
as an inducement to possible purchasers. 

A floor trader who stands in one crowd 
all day is like the buyer for one depart- 
ment — ^he sees more quickly than anyone 
else the demand for that class of goods, 
hut has no way of comparing it to that 
prevailing in other parts of the store. 

He may be trading on the long side of 
Union Pacific, which has a strong up- 
ward trend, when suddenly a break m 
another stock will demoralize the market 
ill Union Pacific, and he will be forced 
to compete with others who have stocks 
to sell. 

The Tape Reader, on the other hand, 
from his perch at the ticker, enjoys a 
bird's eyeview of the whole field. When 
serious weakness develops in any quar- 
ter, he is quick to note, weigh and act. 

Another advantage in favor of the 
Tape Reader: The tape tells the news 
minutes, hours and days before the news 
tickers, or newspapers, and before it 
can become current gossip. Evcr)rthing 
from a foreign war to the passing of a 
dividend ; from a Supreme Court decision 
to the ravages of the boll- weevil is re- 
flected primarily upon the tape. 



AdvanUgM 
of the Tiipe 
Reader 



Tkpe Reading 

The insider who knows a dividend is 
to be jumped from 6 per cent to 10 per 
cent, shows his hand on the tape when he 
starts to accumulate the stock, and the 
investor with 100 shares to sell makes 
his fractional impress upon its market 
price. 

The market is like a slowly revolving 
wheel : Whether the wheel will continue 
to revolve in the same direction, stand 
still or reverse depends entirely upon the 
forces which come in contact with its 
hub and tread. Even when the contact 
is broken, and nothing remains to affect 
its course, the wheel retains a certain im- 
pulse from the most recent dominating 
force, and revolves until it comes to a 
standstill or is subjected to other in^ 
fluences. 

Manipulation ^^^ element of manipulation need not 

discourage any one. Manipulators are 
giant traders, wearing seven-leagued 
boots. The trained ear can detect the 
steady "clump, clump," as they progress, 
and the footprints are recognized in the 
fluctuations and the quantities of stock 
appearing on the tape. Little fellows are 
at liberty to tiptoe wherever the foot- 
prints lead, but they must be careful that 
the giants do not turn quickly. 

The Tape Reader has many advan- 
tages over the long swing operator. He 
never ventures far from shore; that is, 
he plays with a close stop, never laying 
himself open to a large loss. Accidents 
or catastrophes cannot seriously injure 



uttfodnctofy 

him because he can reverse his position 
in an instant, and follow the newly-form- 
ed stream from source to mouth. As his 
position on either the long or short side 
is confirmed and emphasized, he increases 
his line, thus f ollowmg up the advantage 
gained. 

A simon-pure Tape Reader does not a Secure 
care to carry stocks over night. The Podtion 
tape is then silent, and he only knows 
what to do when it tells him. Something 
may occur at midnight which may 
crumple up his diagram of the next 
day's market. He leaves nothing to 
chance; hence he prefers a clean sheet 
when the 3 o'clock gong strikes. 

By this method interest charges are 
avoided, reducing the percentage against 
him to a considerable extent. 

The Tape Reader is like a vendor of 
fruit who, each morning, provides him- 
self with a stock of tne choicest and 
most seasonable products, and for which 
there is the greatest demand. He pays 
his cash and disposes of the goods as 
quickly as possible, at a profit varying 
irom 50 to 100 per cent on cost. To 
carry his stock over night causes a loss 
on account of spoilage. This corresponds 
with the interest charge to the trader. 

The fruit vendor is successful because 
he knows what and when to buy, also 
where and how to sell. But there are 
stormy days when he cannot go out; 
when buyers do not appear; when he is 
arrested, fined, or locked up by a blue- 



Tmpe Rcftding 

coated despot or his wares are scattered 
abroad by a careless truekman. 

Wsdl Street will readily apply these 
situations to the various attitudes in 
which the Tape Reader finds himself. 
Pttlods of Ke ventures $100 to make $200, and as 

the market goes in his favor his risk is 
reduced, but there are times when he 
finds himself at sea, with his stock dete- 
riorating. Or the market is so unsettled 
that he does not know how to act ; he is 
ca^ught on stop or held motionless in a 
dead market ; he takes a series of losses, 
or is obliged to be away from the tape 
when opportunities occur. His calcula- 
tions are completely upset by some un- 
foreseen event or his capital is impaired 
by overtrading or poor judgment. 

The vendor does not hope to buy a 
barrel of apples for $3 and sell them 
the same day for $300. He expects to 
make from nothing to $3 a day. He de- 
fiends upon a small but certain profit, 
which will average enough over a week 
or a month to pay him for his time and 
labor. 

This is the objective point of the Tape 
Reader — ^to make an average profit. In 
a month's operations he may make $4,000 
and lose $3,000— a net profit of $1,000 to 
show for his work. If he can keep this 
average up, trading in 100-share lots, 
tliroughout a year, he has only to increase 
his unit to 200, 300, and 500 shares or 
more, and the results will be tremendous. 

The amount of capital or the size of 



Introductonr 

the order is of secondary importance to 
this question : Can you trade in and out 
of all kinds of markets and show an Avcimft 
average profit over losses, commissions, Profita 
etc. ? If so, you are proficient in the art. 
If you can trade with only a small aver- 
age loss per day, or come out even, you 
are rapidly getting there. 

A Tape Reader abhors information and 
follows a definite and thoroughly tested 
plan, which, after months and years of 
practice, becomes second nature to him. 
His mind forms habits which operate 
automatically in guiding his market ven- 
tures. 

Long practice will make the Tape 
Reader just as proficient in forecasting 
stock market events, but his intuition will 
be reinforced by logic, reason and analy- 
sis. 

Here we find the characteristics which ^hc Scalper 
distinguish the Tape Reader from the 
Scalper. The latter is essentially one 
who tries to grab a point or two profit 
"without rhyme or reason" — ^he don't 
care how, so long as he gets it. 

A Scalper will trade on a tip, a look, 
a guess, a hearsay, on what he thinks or 
what a friend of a friend of Morgan's 
says. 

The Tape Reader evolves himself into 
an automaton which takes note of a sit- 
uation, weighs it, decides upon a course 
and gives an order. There is no quick- 
ening of the pulse, no nerves, no hopes 
or fears. The result produces neither 

—15— 



Reader 



Xime Keediiur 

dation nor depression. There is equa- 
nimity before, during and after the 
trade. 

The Scalper is a bob-tailed car with 
rattling windows, a jouncing motion and 
a strong tendency to jump £e track. 

The Tape Reader is like a Pullman 
coach, which travels smoothly and stead- 
ily along the roadbed of the tape, acquir- 
ing direction and speed from die market 
engine, and beii^ influenced by nodiing 
eU^ whatever. 
Quallficatioiis Having thus described our ideal Tape 

^J^j^^ Reader in a general way, let us inquire 

"* into some of the requisite qualifications. 

First, he must be absolutely self-reli- 
ant. A dependent person, wnose judg- 
ment hangs upon that of others, will find 
himself swayed by a thousand outside 
influences. At critical points his judg- 
ment will be useless. He must be able 
to say : '^The facts are these ; the result- 
ing indications are these; therefore I 
wHl do thus and so." 

Next he must be familiar with the 
technicalities of the market, so that 
every little incident affecting prices will 
be given due weight. He should know 
die history, earnings and financial condi- 
tion of the companies in whose stock he 
is trading; the ways of the manipulators ; 
the different kinds of markets; be able 
to measure the effect of news and 
rumors; know when and in what stocks 
it is best to trade; measure the forces 
behind them; know when to cut a loss 
and take a profit. 



Ditrodactory 

He must study the various swings and 
know where the market and the various 
stocks stand ; must recognize the inherent 
weakness or strength in prices; under- 
stand the basis or logic of movements. 
He should recognize the turning points 
of the market ; see in his mind's eye what 
is happening on the floor. 

He must have the nerve to stand a 
series of losses; persistence to keep him 
at the work during adverse periods ; self- 
control to avoid overtrading; a phl^- 
matic disposition to ballast and balance 
him at all times. 

For perfect concentration as a protec- 
tion from the tips, gossip and other in- 
fluences which abound in a broker's oflice, 
he should, if possible, seclude himself. 
A small room with a ticker, a desk and 
private telephone connection with his 
broker's office are all the facilities re- 
quired. The work requires such delicate 
balance of the faculties that the slightest 
influence either way may throw the result 
against the trader. He may say: 
"Nothing influences me," but uncon- 
sciously it does affect his judgment to 
know that another man is bearish at a 
point where he thinks stocks should be 
bought. The mere thought, "He may be 
right," has a deterrent influence upon 
him ; he hesitates ; the opportunity is lost. 
No matter how the market goes from 
that point, he has missed a cog and his 
mental machinery is thrown out of gear. 



Knowledge of 
Market 



Nerve and 
Patience 



—17— 



Tape Reading 

Silence, therefore, is a much needed lu- 
bricant to the Tape Reader's mind. 
Seclupioa The advisability of having even a news 

ticker in the room, is a subject for dis- 
cussion. The tape tells the present and 
future of the market. On the other hand» 
the news ticker records what has hap- 
pened. It announces the cause for the 
effect which has already been more or 
less felt in the market. 

Money is made in Tape Reading by 
anticipating what is coming — ^not by 
waiting till it happens and going with 
the crowd. 

N«wt The effect of news is an entirely dif- 

ferent propostion. G>nsiderable light 
is thrown on the technical strength or 
weakness of the market and special 
stocks by their action in the face of im- 
portant news. For the moment it seems 
to us that a news tidcer might be ad- 
mitted to the sanctum, provided its whis- 
perings are given only the weight to 
which they are entitled. 

To evolve a practical method — one 
which any trader may use in his daily 
operations and which those with vary- 
ing proficiency in the art of Tape Read- 
ing will find of value and assistance— 
such is the task we have set before us 
in this series. 

Our Tiak We shall consider all the market fac- 

tors of vital importance in Tape Read- 
ing, as well as methods used by experts. 
These will be illustrated by reproductions 
from the tape. Every effort will be made 



Introductory 

to produce something of definite, tangible 
value to those who are now operating in 
a hit-or-miss sort of way. 



II. PreKminary Sufgetttoiu 



Actual 

Trading 

Necettary 



WHEN embarking on any new 
enterprise, the first thing 
to consider is the amount of 
capital required. To study 
Tape Reading "on paper" is one thing, 
but to practice and become proficient in 
the art is quite another. Almost anyone 
can make money on imaginary trades, 
for these require no risk of any kind — 
the mind is free from Hhe strain which 
accompanies an actual venture ; fear does 
not enter into the situation; patience is 
unlimited. 

All this is changed when even a small 
commitment is made. The trader of 
slight experience suffers mental anguish 
if the stock does not go his way; he 
fears a loss, hence his judgment becomes 
warped, and he closes the trade in order 
to secure mental relief. 

As these are all symptoms of inexperi- 
ence, they cannot be overcome by avoid- 
ing the issue. The business-like thing to 
do is to wade right into the game and 
learn to play it under conditions which 



Prdimiiuiry Soggesdoiui 

are to be met and conquered before suc- 
cess can be attained. 

After a complete absorption of every 
available piece of educational writing 
bearing upon Tape Reading, it is best 
to commence trading in ten share lots, 
so as to acquire genuine trading experi- 
ence. This may not suit some people 
with a propensity for gambling, and who 
look upon the ten-share trader as a piker. 
The average lamb with $10,000 wants g^,^ f^n%»\} 
to commence with 100 to 600-share lots 
— ^he wishes to start at the top and work 
down. It is only a question of time 
when he will have to trade in ten-share 
lots. 

To us it seems better to start at the 
bottom with ten shares. There is plenty 
of time in which to increase the unit 
if you are successful. If success is not 
eventually realized you will be many dol- 
lars better off for having risked a mini- 
mum quantity. 

It has already been shown the The 
Magazine of Wall Street that the market 
for odd lots on the New York Stock 
Exchange is most satisfactory, so there 
is no other excuse for the novice who 
desires to trade in round lots than 
greed-of-gain, or get-rich-quick. Think 
of a baby, just learning to walk, being 
entered in a race with professional 
sprinters I 

In the previous chapter we suggested 
that success in Tape Reading should 
be measured by the number of painis 



POtatt* Not 
Dollars 



Capital 



Tapa Raading 

profit over points lost. For all practi- 
cal purposes, therefore, we might trade 
in one*share lots, were there no objec- 
tion on the part of our broker and if 
this quantity were not so absurdly small 
as to invite careless execution. Ten 
shares is really the smallest quantity that 
should be considered, but we mention 
one share simply to impress upon our 
readers that in studying Tape Reading, 
better keep in mind that you are playing 
for points, not dollars. The dollars will 
come along fast enough if you can make 
more points net than you lose. The pro- 
fessional billiardist playing for a stake 
aims to out-point his antagonist. After 
trading for a few months do not con* 
sider the dollars you are ahead or behind, 
but analyze the record in points. In this 
way your progress may be studied. 

As the initial losses in trading are like- 
ly to be heavy, and as the estimated 
capital must be a more or less arbitrary 
amount, we should say that units of 
$1,000 would be necessary for each ten- 
share lot traded in at the beginning. This 
allows for more losses than profits, and 
leaves a margin with which to proceed. 
Some people will secure a footing with 
less capital ; others may be obliged to put 
up several units of $1,000 each before 
thev begin to show profits; still others 
will spend a fortune (large or small) 
without making it pay, or meeting with 
any encouragement. 

Look over R. G. Dun & Co.'s Causes 



Prtliminary SvggMtions 

of Commercial Failures, and you will 
find the chief causes to be: (1) Lack of 
capital, and (2) Incompetence. 

Lack of capital in Wall Street opera- 
tions can usually be traced to over-trad- 
ing. This bears out the epigram, 
"Over-trading is financial suicide." It 
may mean too large a quantity of stock 
in the initial operations, or if the trader 
loses money, he may not reduce the 
size of his trade to correspond with 
the shrinkage in his capital. 

To make our point clear: A man 
starts trading in 100-share lots on 20 
points margin. After a series of losses 
he finds that he has only $200 remain- 
ing. This is still 20 points on ten shares, 
but does he reduce his orders ? No. He 
risks the $200 on a 50 or 100-share trade 
in a last desperate effort to recoup. Af- 
ter being wiped out he tells hif friends 
how he "could have made money if he 
had had more capital." 

Incompetence really deserves first place 
in the list. Supreme ignorance is the 
predominant feature of b3th Wall Street 
lamb and seasoned speculator. It is sur- 
prising how many people stay in the 
Street year after year, acquiring nothing 
more, apparently, than a keen scent for 
tips and gossip. Ask them a technical 
question that smacks of scientific knowU 
edge of trading and they are unable to 
reply. 

Such folks remain on the Street for 
one of two reasons: They have either 



Caiisci of 
Failure 



Over-Trading 



Ignorance 



Tape Reading 

been **hxckY" or their margins are re- 
plenished from some source outside of 
Wall Street. 

The proportion of commercial fail- 
ures due to Lack of Capital or Incom- 
petence is about 60 per cent. Call the 
former by its Wall Street cognomen — 
Overtrading — ^and the percentage of 
stock market disasters traceable thereto 
would be about 90. 

Success is only for the few, and the 
problem is to ascertain, with the mini- 
mum expenditure of time and money, 
whether you are fitted for the work. 
Yl^ These, in a nutshell, are the vital ques- 

Questlont tions up to this point: 

Have you technical knowledge of the 
market and the factors which move it? 

Have you $1,000 or more which you 
can afford to lose in an effort to 
demonstrate your ability at Tape 
Reading? 

Can you devote your entire time and 
attention to the study and the practice 
of this science? 

Are you so fixed financially that you 
are not dependent upon your possible 
profits, and so that you will not suffer 
if none are forthcoming now or later? 

There is no sense in mincing words 
over this matter, nor in holding out 
false encouragement to people who are 
looking for an easy, drop-a-penny-in- 
the-slot way of making money. Tape 
Reading is hard work, hence those who 
are mentally lazy need not apply. 



PrcHmifuify SoggMBons 

Nor should anyone to whom it will 
mean worry as to where his bread and 
butter is coming from. Money-worry 
is not conducive to clear-headedness. 
Over-anxiety upsets the equilibrium of 
a trader more than anything else. So» 
if you cannot afford the time and money, 
and have not the other necessary quali- 
fications, do not begin. Start right or 
not at all. 

Having decided to proceed, the trader 
who is equal to the foregoing circum- 
stances finds himself asking, ''Where 
shall I trade?" 

The choice of a broker is an im- 
portant matter to the Tape Reader. He 
should find one especially equipped for choice of 
the work: who can give close attention Brokers 
to his orders, furnish quick bid and 
asked prices, and other technical infor- 
mation, such as the quantities wanted 
and offered at different levels, etc. The 
broker most to be desired should never 
have so much business on hand that he 
cannot furnish the trader with a verbal 
flash of what "the crowd" in this or 
that stock is doing. This is important, 
for at times it will be money in the 
pocket to know just in what momentary 
position a stock or the whole market 
stands. The broker who is not over- 
burdened with business can give this 
service ; he can also devote time and care 
to the execution of orders. 

Let me give an instance of how this 
works out in practice : You are long 100 



Tape RMdi&c 

Union, with a stop-order just under the 
market price; a dip comes and 100 

HandUag shares sells at your stop price — say 164. 

an Order Your careful, and not too busy broker 

stands in the crowd. He observes that 
several thousand shares are bid for at 
164 and only a few hundred are offered 
at the price. He does not sell the stock, 
but waits to see if it won't rally. It 
does rallv. You are given a new lease of 
life. This handling of the order may 
benefit you $50, $100 or several hun- 
dred dollars in eadi instance, and is an 
advantage to be sought when choosing 
a broker. 

The house which transacts an active 
commission business for a large clientele 
is unable to give this service. Its stop- 
orders and other orders not "'close to 
the market," must be given to Special- 
ists, and the press of business is such 
that it cannot devote marked attention 
to the orders of any one client. Hence, 
it would seem that our Tape Reader had 
better search for a small commission 
house which has one New York Stock 
Exchange member, ah office partner and 
only one or two employees. 

The number of clerks is a good in- 
dex to the amount of business done. 
Their fewness is not a reflection on the 
A gnwill strength, standing, or brokerage ability 

Firm Beet of the house. Some people are good 

brokers and have ample capital, but they 
do not understand the science of busi- 
ness getting. 



Pr^Umiiiarjr Sugg MtioiM 

In a small house, such as we have de- 
scribed^ the Tape Reader is less likdy 
to be bothered by a gallery of tnders, 
with their diverse and loud-spoken opm* 
ions. In other words» he will be IdfTx 
more or less to himself and be free to ^ 
concentrate upon his task. 

The ticker should be within calling 
distance of the telephone to the Stock 
Exchange. Some brokers have a way 
of making you or a clerk walk a mile 
to give an order. Eveiy step means de- 
lay. The elapse of a few seconds may 
result in a lost market or opportunity. 
If you are in a small private room away 
from the order desk, there should be a 
private telephone connecting you with 
the order clerk. Ponderous, ice-wagon 
methods won't go in Tape Reading. 

Orders should generally be given "at Qtvlng Orders 
the market." We make this statement 
as a result of long experience and ob- 
servation, and believe we can demon- 
strate the advisability of it. 

I'he process of reporting transactions 
on the tape, constunes from five seconds 
to five minutes, depending upon the ac- 
tivity of the market. For argument's 
sake, let us consider that the average 
interval between the time a sale takes 
place on the floor and the report ap- 
pears on the tape is half a minute. 

A market order in an active stock is 
usually executed and reported to the 
customer in about two minutes. Half 
this time is consumed in putting your 

—If— 



TApe Readbig 

broker into the crowd with the order in 
hand ; the other half in writing out and 
transmitting the report. Hence, when 
Union Pacific comes 164 on the tape 
and you instantly decide to buy it, tne 
period of time between your decision 
and the execution of your order is as 
follows : 

Minutes. 

The tape is behind the market }^ 

Time elapsed before broker can ex- 
ecute the order 1 



154 

It will therefore be seen that your de- 
cision is based on a price which prevail- 
ed half a minute ago, and that you must 
fiurchase if you will, at the price at 
which the stock stands one minute hence. 

This might happen between your de- 
cision and the execution of your order: 

UP 164. H- VA' H' y2' Ya^ H' 16^> 

and yours might be the last hundred. 
When the report arrives you may not 
be able to swear that it was bought at 
164 before or after it touched 164^. Or 
you might get it at 164^, even though it 
was 164 when you gave the order, and 
when the report was handed to you. 
Just as often, the opposite will take 

{lace — ^the stock will go in ygur favor, 
n fact, the thing averages up in tihe 
long run, so that traders who do not 
give market orders are hurting their own 
chances. 



Plrdhniiuiiy SoggMtioiw 

An infinite number of traders, seeing Linitad 
Union Pacific at 164, will say : Ord«n 

"Buy me a hundred at 164." 
The broker who is not too busy will 
go into the crowd, and, finding the stock 
at IMji at }i will report back to the of- 
fice that "Union is H bid." 

The trader g^ves his broker no credit 
for this service ; instead he considers it 
a sign that his broker, the floor traders 
and the insiders have all conspired to 
make him pay ^ per cent, higher for 
his 100 shares, so he replies: 

"Let it stand at 164. If they don't 
give it to me at that, I won't buy it at 
aU." 

How foolish! Yet it is characteristic 
of the style of reasoning used by the pub- 
lic. His argument is that the stock, for 
good and sufiicient reasons, is a purchase 
at 164. At 164^ or % these reasons 
are completely nullified; the stock be- 
comes dear, or he cares more to foil the 
plans of this "band of robbers" than for 
a possible profit. 

If a stock is cheap at 164 it's cheap at 
164>^. 

If you can't trust your broker, get an- 
other. 

If you think the law of supply and On tiie 
demand is altered to catch your $25, Floor 
better reorganize your thinkery. 

Were you on the floor you could prob- 
ably buy at 164 the minute it touched 
that figure, but of this there is no cer- 
tainty. You would, however, be lyi 



Tape Readiiig 

minutes nearer to the market Your 
commission charges would also be prac- 
tically eliminated. Therefore, if you 
have seventy or eighty thousand dol- 
lars which you do not especially need, 
buy a seat on the Stock Exchange. 

A Tape Reader who deserves the 
name, makes money in spite of commis- 
sions, taxes and delays. 

If you don't get aboard your train, 
youll never arrive. 

Giving limited orders loses more good 
dollars than it saves. We refer, of 
course, to orders in the big, active stocks, 
wherein the bid and asked prices are 
usually yi apart. Especially is this true 
in closing out a trade. Many foolish 
people are interminably hung up because 
they try to save eighths by giving limit- 
ed orders in a market that is running 
away from them. 

For the Tape Reader there is a 
psychological moment when he must 
open or close his trade. His orders 
must therefore be "at the market." 
Haggling over fractions will make him 
lose the thread of the tape, upset his 
]X>ise and interrupt the workings of his 
mental machinery. 

Scale In scale buying or selling it is obvi- 

Trading Q^s that limited orders must be used. 

There are certain other times when they 
are of advantage, but as the Tape 
Reader generally goes with the trend, 
it is a case of "get on or get left.* 

By all means "get on.' 



PrdimJMry Sug gcttioiit 

The selection of stocks is an important 
matter, and should be decided in a gen- 
eral way before one starts to trade. Let 
ns see what we can reason out. 

If you are trading in 100-share lots, 
your stock must move your way one 
point to make $100 profit. 

Which class of stocks are most 
likely to move a point? Answer: The 
high-priced issues. 

Looking over the records we find that 
a stock selling around 150 will average 
2}i points fluctuations a day, while one 
selling at 60 will average only one point 
Consequently, vou have 2>4 times more 
action in the higher priced stock. 

The commission and tax charges are 
the same in both. Interest charges are 
three times as large, but this is an in- 
significant item to the Tape Reader who 
closes out his trades each day. 

The higher priced stocks also cover 
a greater number of points during the 
year or cycle than those of lower price. 
Stocks like Great Northern, although en- 
joying a much wider range, are not de- 
sirable for trading purposes when up 
to 300 or more, because fluctuations and 
bid and asked prices are too far apart to 
permit rapid in-and-out trading. 

The trend of the general market is 
largely made by the following stocks, 
in uie order named : 

Union Pacific 

Reading 

Steel Common 



Th« Selecttoo 
of Stocks 



Important 
Stocks 



-ai- 



Union Pftdfic 



RMidlng 



U. 8. StMl 



8t FmiI 



Anaconda 



Tape Raading 

St Paul 

Anaconda 

Smelters 

Union Pacific is a leader because there 
is a large floating supply, a broad mar- 
ket and wide swings; it is popular with 
floor traders, big and little. Southern 
Pacific is its nmning mate, but owing to 
the smaller number of shares of the lat- 
ter afloat, it seldom dii§putes for the lead- 
ership. 

Reading's daily swings are on about 
the same scale as Union Pacific. There 
is only $70,000,000 of it outstanding. The 
floating supply is small, owing to the 
large blocks held by other roads, or by 
permanent investors. Hence, it is easy 
to manipulate. The comparative scarcity 
of the stock is shown in the frequent 
of % point fluctuations between sales. It 
is a very satisfactory stock for Tape 
Reading operations. 

Steel common reflects the five million 
shares outstanding and the consequent 
widespread public interest. It is useful 
as a barometer of the market and of 
public sentiment, but its swings are rarely 
wide enough for the Tape Reader, as 
they average only about a point a day. 

St. Paul is one of the truest stocks for 
trading purposes. It is manipulated at 
times, but generally it responds automati- 
cally to the slightest change in market 
temper. Its daily movements are not as 
wide as Union Pacific or Reading. 

Anaconda is the leading copper stock, 



Preliminary Snggestioiis 

has some satisfactory moves and offers 
S^ood opportunity for trading. 

Smelters is one of the most highly 
manipulated issues on the list, erratic, 
often difficult to follow, at other times 
easy. Its daily range is usually equal 
to file others. One gets plenty of action 
in Smelters, but not nearly the steadiness, 
nor the clearly defined trend prevailing 
in the other big stocks. 

As a result of observation and years 
of trading experience, we prefer Union 
Pacific and Reading. These two issues 
are often the chief hinges on which the 
door of the market turns — ^Union the 
upper, Reading the lower hinge. It is 
unnecessary for anyone to go beyond 
these except in times when the indus- 
trials dominate the market; in this case, 
Anaconda, Smelters or Steel will replace 
them. 

It is better for a Tape Reader to trade 
in one stock than two or more. Stocks 
have habits and characteristics which 
are as distinct as those of human beings 
or animals. By a close study the trader 
becomes intimately acquainted with 
these habits and is able to anticipate the 
stock's action under given circumstances. 
A stock may be stubborn, sensitive, ir- 
responsive, complaisant, aggressive; it 
may dominate the tape or trail along be- 
hind the rest; it is whimsical and co- 
*quettish. Its nxoods must be studied if 
you would know it and bend it to your 
win. 



Smelten 



Best Stocks 
for the Tape 
Reader 



Trade in 
One Stock 
at a Time 



Tape Reading 

Study implies concentration. A per- 
son who trades in a dozen stocks at a 
time caimot concentrate on one. 

The popular method of trading (which 
means the unsuccessful way) is to say: 

"I think the market's a sale. Smel- 
ters, Copper and St. Paul have had the 
biggest rise lately; they ought to have 
a good reaction; sell a hundred of each 
for me." 

Trades based on "thinks" seldom pan 
out well. The selection of two or three 
stocks by guesswork, instead of one by 
reason and analysis, explains many of 
the public's losses. If a trader wishes 
to trade in three hundred shares, let 
him sell that quantity of the stock 
Concentrate which he knows most about, or which 

is entitled to the greatest decline. Un- 
less he is playing the long swing he in- 
jures his chances by trading in a lot of 
stocks at once. It's like chasing a drove 
of pigs — while you're watching this one 
the others get away. 

Better to concentrate on one or two 
stocks and study them exhaustively. You 
will find that what applies to one does 
not always fit the other: each must be 
judged on its own merits. The vary- 
ing price levels, volumes, percentage of 
floating supply, investment values, the 
manipulation and other factors, all tend 
to produce a different combination in 
each particular case. 



Uh Tke Stock List Analyzed 



IN the last chapter we referred to 
Union Pacific as the most desirable 
stock for active trading. A friend 
of mine once made a composite 
chart of the principal active stocks, for 
the purpose of ascertaining which, in its 
daily fluctuations, followed the course of The Best 
the general market most accurately. He Stock 
found Union Pacific was what might be 
called the market backbone, while the 
others, especially Reading, frequently 
showed erratic tendencies, running up or 
down, more or less contrary to the gen- 
eral trend. Of all the issues under in- 
spection, none possessed the all-around 
steadiness and general desirability for 
trading purposes displayed by Union 
Pacific. 

But the Tape Reader, even if he de- 
cides to operate exclusively in one 
stock, cannot close his eyes to what is 
going on in others. Frequent oppor- 
tunities occur elsewhere. In proof of 
this, take the market in the early fall 
of 1907: Union Pacific was the leader 
throughout the rise from below 150 to 
1675^. For three or four days before 



Tiy^ RMidiiig 

this advance culminated, heavy selling 
cxxurred in Reading, St. Paul, G)pper, 
Steel and Smelters, under cover of the 
strength in Union. This made the turn- 
ing point of the market as clear as day- 
light. One had only to go short of Read- 
ing and await the break, or he could have 
played Union with a close stop, know- 
ing that the whole market would collapse 
as soon as Union turned downward. 
When the liquidation in other stocks was 
completed. Union stopped advancing, the 
supporting orders were withdrawn, and 
the "pre-dection break" took place. This 
amounted to over 20 points in Union, 
with proportionate declines in the rest of 

View tfa« ^^ "St- 

Market The operator who was watching only 

Broedly Union would have been surprised at 

this; but had he viewed the whole mar- 
ket he must have seen what was coming. 
Knowing the point of distribution, he 
would be on the lookout for the accu- 
mulation which must follow, or at least 
the level where support would be forth- 
coming. Had he been expert enough to 
detect this, quick money could have been 
made on the subsequent rally. 

While Union Pacific constitutes the 
backbone, this important member is only 
one part of the market body, which after 
all is very like the physical structure of 
a human being. 

Suppose Union is strong and advanc- 
ing; suddenly New York Central devel- 
ops an attack of weakness ; Consolidated 



The Stock List Analysed 

Gas goes off; American Ice becomes 
nauseatingly weak; Southern Railway 
and Great Western follow suit. There 
may be nothing the matter with the 
"backbone," but its strength will be af- 
fected by weakness among the others. 

A bad break may come in Brooklyn Symi>athetic 
Rapid Transit, occasioned by a political Movcmentt 
attack, or other purely local influence. 
This cannot possibly affect the business 
of the grangers, transcontinentals, or 
coalers, yet St. Paul, Union, and Read- 
ing decline as much as B. R. T. A per- 
son whose finger is crushed will some- 
times faint from the shock to his nervous 
system, although the injured member will 
in no wise affect the other members or 
functions of the body. 

The time-worn illustration of the 
chain which is as strong as its weakest 
link, will not serve. When the weak 
link breaks the chain is in two parts, 
each part being as strong as its weakest 
link. The market does not break in 
two, even when it receives a severe blow. 
If something occurs in the nature of dis- 
aster, whereby the money situation, in- 
vestment demand, public sentiment, or 
corporate earning power, are deeply af- 
fected, a tremendous break may occur, 
but there is always a level, even in a 
panic, where buying power becomes 
strong enough fo produce a rally or a 
permanent upturn. 

The Tape Reader must endeavor to 
operate in that stock which combines fhe 



Tape Reading 

widest swings with the broadest mar- 
ket; he may therefore frequently find 
it to his advantage to switch temporarily 
into other issues which seem to offer the 
quickest and surest profits. Hence it is 
necessary for us to become familiar with 
the characteristics of the principal specu- 
lative mediums that we may judge their 
advantages in this respect, as well as 
their weight and bearing upon a given 
market situation. 

The Market The market is made by the minds of 

is Mental many men. The state of these minds 

is reflected in the prices of securities in 
which their owners operate. Let us ex- 
amine some of the individuals, as well 
as the influences behind certain stocks 
and groups of stocks in their various re- 
lationships. This will, in a sense, enable 
us to measure their respective power to 
affect the whole list or the specific issue 
in which we decide to operate. 

The market leaders are, as already 
stated. Union, Reading, Steel, St. Paul, 
Anaconda and Smelters. Manipulators, 
professionals and the public derive their 
inspiration largely from the action of 
these six issues, in which, except during 
the "war" markets of 1914-16, from 
forty to eighty per cent, of the total daily 
transactions are concentrated. We will 
therefore designate these as the "Big 
Six." 

Three stocks out of the Big Six are 
chiefly influenced by the operations of 
what is known as the Kuhn-Loeb-Stand- 



The Stock List Analyzed 

ard Oil party. Their four stocks are The Big Six 
Union, St. Paul, and Anaconda. Of the 
other two. Smelters is handled by the 
Guggenheims, while Steel, controlled by 
Morgan, is unquestionably swung up and 
down more by the influence of public 
sentiment than anything else. Of course 
the condition of the steel trade forms 
the basis of important movements in this 
issue, and occasionally Morgan or some 
other large interest may take a hand by 
buying or selling a few hundred thousand 
shares, but, generally speaking, it is the 
attitude of the public which chiefly af- 
fects the price of Steel common. This 
should be borne strictly in mind, as it 
is a valuable guide to the technical posi- 
tion of the market, which turns on the 
over-bought or oversold condition of the 
market. 

Next in importance come what we will 
term the Secondary Leaders; viz., those 
which at times burst into great activity, 
accompanied by large volume. These are 
termed Secondary Leaders, because while 
they seldom influence the Big Six to a 
marked extent, the less important issues 
usually fall into line at their initiative. 

The principal Secondary Leaders are: 

Atchison 

Baltimore & Ohio 

Brooklyn Rapid Transit Secondary 

Colorado Fuel ^^^"^ 

Consolidated Gas 

Erie 

Great Northern 



Minor Stocks 



Minor Stocks 
Do Not Lead 



Tape Reading 

Northern Pacific 
Illinois Central 
Louisville & Nashville 
Missouri Pacific 
Norfolk & Western 
New York Central 
Pennsylvania 
Republic Iron & Steel 
Southern Pacific 
American Sugar 

Another group which we will call the 
Minor Stocks is comprised of less im- 
portant issues^ mostly low-priced, and 
embracing many public favorites, such 
as 

American Car & Foundry 

Chesapeake & Ohio 

Chicago Great Western 

Colorado Southern 

Denver & Rio Grande 

Interborou^h 

Missouri, Kansas & Texas 

Ontario & Western 

Rock Island 

Southern Railway 

Wabash 

Some people, when they see an ad- 
vance inaugurated in some of the Minor 
Stocks, sudi as Chesapeake & Ohio, On- 
tario & Western, or Rock Island, are 
led to buy Pennsylvania, Reading and 
other Primary or Secondary Leaders, on 
the ground that the latter will be bull- 
ishly affected. This sometimes occurs; 
more often it does not. It is just as 
fallacious to expect a 6,000-share oper« 



The Stock Liit Analysed 

ator to follow a 100-share trader, or a 
100-share man to be influenced by the 
10-share trader. 

The various stocks in the market are 
like a gigantic fleet of boats, all hitched 
together and being towed by the tugs 
"Money Situation," and "Business Con- 
ditions." In the first row are the Big 
Six; behind them, the Secondary Lead« 
ers, the Minors, and the Miscellaneous 
issues in the order named. It takes time 
to generate steam and to get the fleet 
under way. The leaders are first to feel 
the impulse; the others follow in turn. 
Should the tugs halt, the fleet will run 
along for awhile under its own momen- 
tum, and there will be a certain amount 
of bumping, backing and filling. In case 
the direction of the tugs is changed 
abruptly, the bumping is apt to be severe. 
Obviously, those in the rear cannot gain 
and hold the leadership without an all- 
arotmd readjustment. 

The Big Six are representative of 
America's greatest industries — railroad- 
ing, steel making, and mining. It is 
but natural that these stocks should form 
the principal outlet for the country's 
speculative tendencies. The Union Pa- 
cific and St. Paul systems cover the en- 
tire West. Reading, of itself a large 
railroad property, dominates the coal 
mining industry; it is so interlaced with 
other railroads as to typify the Eastern 
situation. Steel is closely bound up with 
the state of general busmess throughout 



Tape Reading 

the states, while Anaconda and Smelters 
are the controlling factors in copper min- 
ing and the smelting industry. 

By classifying the principal active 
stocks we can recognize more clearly the 
forces behind their movements. For in- 
stance, if Consolidated Gas suddenly be- 
comes strong and active, we know it will 
probably affect Brooklyn Union Gas, but 
Sympathetic there is no reason why the other Stand- 
Rc^tions ard Oil stocks should advance more than 

slightly and out of sympathy. If all 
the stocks in the Standard Oil group ad- 
vance m a steady and sustained fashion, 
we know that these capitalists are en- 
^ged in a bull campaign. As these peo- 
ple do not enter deals for a few points 
it is safe to go along with them for 
awhile, or until distribution becomes ap- 
parent. 

An outbreak of speculation in Colorado 
Fuel is not necessarily a bull argument 
on the other Steel stocks. If it were 
based on trade conditions, U. S. Steel 
would be the first to feel the impetus, 
which would radiate to the others. 

In selecting the most desirable stock 
out of the Kuhn-Loeb-Standard Oil 
group, for instance, the Tape Reader 
must consider whether conditions favor 
the greatest activity and volumes in the 
railroad or industrial field. In the former 
case, his choice would be Union Pacific 
or St. Paul ; in the latter. Anaconda. 

• ^^?^^^?*^ Erie may come out of its rut (as it 
Btodc Rarely jjj ^^^^^ ^j^^ summer of 1907, when it 



The Stock List Analysed 

was sdling around 24), and attain lead- 
ership among the low-priced stocks. This 
indicates some important development in 
Erie; it does not foreshadow a rise in 
all the low-priced stocks. But if a strong 
rise starts in Union Pacific, and Southern 
Pacific and the others in the group fol- 
low consistently, the Tape Reader will 
get into the leader and stay with it. He 
will not waste time on Erie, for while 
it is moving up 5 points. Union Pacific 
may advance 10 or 15 points, provided 
it is a genuine move. Many valuable 
deductions may be made by studying 
these groups. 

Experience has shown that when a 
rise commences in Atchison (a Second- 
ary Leader), the Big Six is about done 
and distribution is taking place, under 
protection of the strength in Atchison 
and others in its class. Sug^ acts in a 
similar capacity for the Standard Oil 
group. Professional traders used to call 
these stocks "Indicators." 

The absence of inside manipulation 
in a stock leaves the way open for pools 
to operate, and many of the moves that 
are observed in these groups are pro- 
duced by a handful of floor or office 
operators, who, by joining hands and 
swinging large quantities, are able to 
force their stock in the desired direc- 
tion. 

U. S. Steel is swayed by conditions 
in the steel trade, and the speculative 
temper of the general public, assisted 



Indicaton 



Pools 



The Public 



Tftpe Reading 

occasionally by some of the insiders. No 
other stock on the list is such a true 
index of the attitude of the public, or 
the technical position of the market. In- 
cluding those who own the stock out- 
right, and those who carry it on margin, 
probably a quarter of a million people 
here and abroad closely follow its move- 
ments. Reports of the steel trade are 
most carefully scrutinized, and the cor- 
poration's earnings and orders on hand 
minutely studied by thousands. 

This great public rarely sells its fa- 
vorite short, but carries it "paid for," 
or on margin until a profit is secured, or 
until it is shaken or scared out in a vio- 
lent decline. Hence, if the stock is 
strong under adverse news, we may 
infer that public holdings are strongly 
fortified, and that confidence abounds. 
If Steel displays more than its share of 
weakness, an untenable position of the 
public is indicated. 

The other steel stocks are dominated 
by the giant corporation, and do not 
often furnish indications of value to 
Tape Readers, except at the end of a 
long rise. 

BquipoMnt ^^ ^^ point public sentiment be- 

Stocki comes intensely bullish and spreads 

itself in the low-priced speculative 
shares. Insiders in the junior steel 
stocks take advantage of diis and are 
able to advance and find a good market 
for their holdings. 
The Equipment Stocks find their 



Tht Stock List Analysed 

a 

chief inspiration in the orders for cars, 
locomotives, etc., placed by the rail- 
roads. These orders are dependent 
upon general business conditions. Con- 
sequently the equipment issues can 
seldom be expected to do more than fol- 
low the trend of prosperity or depres- 
sion. 

We should thus introduce ourselves to 
the principal speculative mediums and 
their families, each of which, upon closer 
acquaintance, seems to have a sort of 
personality. If we stand in a room with 
fifty or a hundred people, all of whom 
we know, as regards their chief motives 
and characteristics, we can form definite 
ideas as to their probable actions under 
a given set of circumstances. 

So it becomes the Tape Reader to Knowledge 
acquaint himself with the most minute of Details 
details pertaining to these market 
identities, also with the habits, mo- 
tives and methods of the men who 
make the principal moves on the 
Stock Exchange chess-board. 



rV. Stop Orders, Trading Rules, &c. 

WHEN a person contemplates 
an extensive trip, one of the 
first things taken into ac- 
count is the expense involved. 
In planning our excursion into the realms 
of Tape Reading we must, therefore, 
carefully weigh the expenses, or fixed 
charges in trading. 

Were there no expenses, profit-mak- 
ing would be far easier — ^profits would 
merely have to exceed losses. But no 
matter whether you are a member of the 
New York Stock Exchange or not, in 
actual trading profits must exceed losses 
and expenses. These are incurred in 
every trade, whether it shows a gain or 
a loss. They consist of: 

Commission on 100 shares $25.00 

"Invisible eighth" 12.50 

(Difference between bid and 

asked price, assuming that you 

buy and sell at the market 

price.) 
Tax on sale* 2.00 



$39.60 

*Thi8 hmt since been increased to $4.00. 



Stop Ordcri» Trading lbil««, Ac. 

in addition to interest if the trade it car- 
ried over night. 

By purchasing a New York Stock 
Exchange seat, the commission can be 
reduced to $1 per hundred shares, if 
bought and sold the same day, or $3,125^ ^ 
if carried over night. This advantage 
is partly offset by interest on the cost 
of the seat, dues, assessments, etc., which 
amount to nearly $5,000 per annum on 
a seat costing $75,000. 

The "invisible eighth" is a factor The Invisible 
which no one — ^not even a member— can Eighth 
overcome. The bid and asked price is 
never less than an eighth apart. If the 
market be 45^ @5^ when you buy, you 
will as a rule, pay }i. Were you to sell 
it would be at J4. This hypothetical 
difference follows you all through the 
trade and has been designated by the 
writer as the "invisible eighth." 

The Tape Reader who is a non-member 
must, therefore, realize that the instant 
he gives an order to go long or short 
100 shares, he has lost $39.50. In order 
that he may not fool himself, he should 
add his commissions {%%) to his pur- 
chase price, or deduct them from his sell- 
ing price immediately. People who boast 
of their profits usually forget to deduct 
expenses. Yet it is this insidious item 
which frequently throws the net re* 
suit over to the debit side. 

The expression is frequently heard, 
"I got out even, except the commissions," 
the speaker evidently scorning such a 

— 4T— 



Tape Reading 

trifling consideration. This sort of self- 
deception is ruinous, as will be seen by 
computing the fixed charges on 10 trades 
— n$396— or on 20 trades— $790. Bear m 
mind that a loss of $39.50 on the first 
trade leaves double that amount — $79 — 
to be made on the second trade before 
a dollar of profit is secured. 

It therefore appears that the Tape 
Reader's problem is not only to elim- 
inate losses, but to cover his expenses 
as quickly as may be. If he has a 
couple of points profit in a long trade, 
there is no reason why he should let the 
stock run back below his net buying 
price. Here circumstances seem to call 
Uie of for a stop order, so that no matter what 

Stop Orders happens, he will not be compelled to 

pay out money. This stop should not 
be thrust in when net cost is too close to 
the market price. Reactions must be 
allowed for. 

A Tape Reader is essentially one who 
follows the immediate trend. An ex- 
pert can readily distinguish between a 
change of trend and a reaction. When 
his mental barometer indicates a change 
he does not wait for a stop order to be 
caught, but cleans house or reverses his 
position in a twinkling. The stop order 
at net cost is, therefore, of advantage 
only in case of a reversal which is sudden 
and pronounced. 

A stop should also be placed if the 
operator is obliged to leave the tape for 
more than a moment, or if the ticker gets 



Stop Orderly Ttmdinc Rules, Ac. 

out of order. While he has his eye on 
the tape the market will tell him what 
to do. The moment this condition does 
not exist he must act as he would if 
temporarily stricken blind — ^he must pro- 
tect himself from forces which may 
assail him in the dark. 

I know a trader who once bought 600 
shares of Sugar and then went out to 
lunch. He paid 25 cents for what he 
ate, but on returning to the tape he 
found that the total cost of that lunch 
was $5,000.25. He had left no stop 
order, Sugar went down ten points, and 
his broker wore a MM (more margin 
button) in his lapel. 

The ticker has a habit of becoming Acddentt 
incoherent at the most critical points. 
Curse it as we may, it will resume 
printing intelligibly when the trouble is 
overcome — not before. As the loss of 
even a few inches of quotations may be 
important, a stop should be placed at 
once and left in until the flow of prices 
is resumed. 

H a trade is carried over night, a stop 
should be entered against the possibility 
of accident to the market or the trader. 
An important event may develop before 
the next day's opening by which the 
stock will be violently affected. The 
trader may be taken ill, be delayed in 
arrival, or in some way be incapacitated. 
A certain allowance must be made for 
accidents of every kind. 

As to where the stop should be placed 



Points of 
Redttance 



Antomadc 
Stops 



Tape Reading 

under such conditions, this depends 
upon circumstances. The consensus of 
shrewd and experienced traders is in 
favor of two points maximum gross loss 
on any one trade. This is purely arbi- 
trary, however. The Tape Reader 
knows, as a rule, what to do when he 
is at the tape, but if he is separated from 
the market by any contingency, he will 
be obliged to fall back upon the arbi- 
trary stop. 

A closer stop may be obtained by 
noting the "points of resistance" — the 
levels at which the market turns after a 
reaction. For example, if you are short 
at 130 and the stock breaks to 128, rallies 
to 129, and then turns down again, the 
point of resistance is 129. In case of 
temporary absence or interruption to the 
service, a good stop would be 129^ or 
12954* These "points of resistance" 
will be more fully discussed later. 

If the operator wishes to use an auto- 
matic stop, a very good method is this: 
Suppose the initial trade is made with 
a one-point stop. For every J^ the 
stock moves in your favor, change the 
stop to correspond, so that the stop is 
never more nor less than one point away 
from the extreme market price. This 
gradually and automatically reduces the 
risk, and if the Tape Reader be at all 
skilful, his profits must exceed losses. 
As soon as the stop is thus raised to 
cover commissions, it would seem best 
not to make it automatic thereafter, but 



•50- 



Stop Orders, Trading Rules, ftc. 

let the market develop its own stop or 
"signal" to get out. 

One trouble with this kind of a stop 
is that it interferes with the free play 
of judgment. A homely illustration will 
explain why : A tall woman and a short 
man attempt to cross the street. An 
automobile approaches. The woman 
sees that th^re is ample time in which 
to cross, but he has her by the arm and 
being undecided himself backs and fills, 
first pushing, then pulling her by the arm 
until they finally return to the curb, after 
a hairbreadth escape. Left to herself, 
she would have known exactly what to 
do. 

It is the same with the Tape Reader. 
He is hampered by an automatic stop. 
It is best that he be free to act as his 
judgment dictates, without feeling com- 
pelled by a prior resolution to act accord- 
ing to hard and fast rule. 

There is another time when the stop 
order is of value to the Tape Reader, 
viz., when his indications are not clearly 
defined. The original commitment Uncertainty 
should, of course, be made only when the 
trend is positively indicated, but situa- 
tions will develop when he will be uncer- 
tain whether to stand pat, close out, or 
reverse his position. At such a time it 
seems better to push the stop up to a 
point as close as possible to the market 

Erice, without choking off the trade. 
\y this we mean a reasonable area 
should be allowed for temporary fluctua- 

—51— 



Tape Reading 

tions. If the stock emerges from its un- 
certainty by going in the desired direc- 
tion, the stop can be changed or can- 
celled. If its trend becomes adverse, 
the trade is automatically closed. 

Pear Fear, hesitation and uncertainty are 

deadly enemies of the Tape Reader. 
The chief cause of fear is over-trading. 
Therefore commitments should be no 
greater than can be borne by one's sus- 
ceptibility thereto. 

Hesitation must be overcome by self 

training. To observe a positive indi- 

Hetitation cation and not act upon it is fatal — ^more 

so in closing than in opening a trade. 
The appearance of a definite indication 
should be immediately followed by an 
order. Seconds are often more valuable 
than minutes. The Tape Reader is not 
the captain — ^he is but the engineer who 
controls the machinery. The Tape is 
the pilot and the engineer must obey 
orders with promptness and precision. 

We have defined a Tape Reader as 
one who follows the immediate trend. 
This means that he pursues the line of 
least resistance. He goes with the 
market — he does not buck it. The 
operator who opposes the immediate 
trend pits his judgment and his hundred 
or more shares against the world's supply 
or demand and the weight of its millions 
of shares. Armed with a broom, he is 
trying to stay the incoming tide. 

When he goes with the trend, the 



Stop Orders, Tmding Ru1m» ftc. 

forces of supply, demand and manipu- 
lation are working for and with him. 

A market which swings within a ra- SU*** 
dius of a couple of points cannot be said Markets 
to have a trend, and is a good one for the 
Tape Reader to avoid. The reason is: 
Unless he catches the extremes of the 
little swings, he cannot pay commissions, 
take occasional losses and come out 
ahead. No yacht can win in a dead 
calm. As it costs him nearly half a 
point to trade, each risk should contain 
a probable two to five points profit, or 
it is not justified. 

A mechanical engineer, given the 
weight of an object, the force of the 
blow which strikes it, and the element 
through which it must pass, can figure 
approximately how far the object will 
be driven. So the Tape Reader, by 
gauging the impetus or the energy 
with which a stock starts and sus- 
tains a movement, decides whether it 
is likdy to travel far enough to war- 
rant his going with it — ^whether it will 
pay its expenses and remunerate him for 
his boldness. 

The ordinary tip-trading speculator 
gulps a point or two profit and dis- 
dains a loss, unless it is big enough to 
strangle him. The Tape Reader must 
do the opposite — ^he must cut out 
every possible eighth loss and search for 
chances to make three, five and ten 
points. He does not have to grasp 
everything that looks like an opportu- 



Tape Reading 

nity. It is not necessary for him to be 
in the market continuously. He 
chooses only the best of what the tape 
offers. 

His original risks can be gradually 
effaced by clever arrangement of stop 
orders when a stock goes his way. He 
Mental may keep these in his head or put them 

Stops Qjj ^j^^ "floor." For my own part I pre- 

fer, having decided upon a danger 
point, to maintain a mental stop and 
when the price is reached close the 
trade "at the market." Reason : There 
may be ground for a change of plan or 
opinion at the last moment; if a stop 
is on the floor it takes time to cancel or 
change it, hence there is a period of a 
few minutes when the operator does not 
know where he stands. By using mental 
stops and market orders he always knows 
where he stands, except as regards the 
prices at which his orders are executed. 
The main consideration is, he knows 
whether he is in or out. 

The placing of stops is most effectual 
and scientific when indicated by the mar- 
ket itself. An example of this is as 
follows : 



Tape Reading 

placed at 127Ji, which is yi below the 
last point of resistance. 
Market The stock goes above its previous top 

Indication {129>^) and continues to 130 J^. At any 

of Stopt ^in^e after it has crossed 130 the oper- 

ator may raise his stop to cost plus com- 
mission (129). The stock reacts at 
129}i, then continues the advance to 
above 131. As soon as a new high point 
is reached the stop is raised to 129^, as 
129^ was the point of resistance on the 
dip. 

In such a case the initial risk was Ji 
plus commissions, etc., the market giving 
a well defined stop point, making an ar- 
bitrary stop not only unnecessary but ex- 
pensive. The illustration is given in 
chart form, but the experienced Tape 
Reader generally carries these swings in 
his head. A series of higher tops and 
bottoms are made in a pronounced up 
swing and the reverse in a down swing. 

Arbitrary stops may, of course, be used 
at any time, especially if one wishes to 
clinch a substantial profit, but until a 
stock gets away from the price at which 
it was entered, it seems best to use the 
stops it develops for itself. 

If the operator is shaken out of his 
holdings immediately after entering 
the trade, it does not prove his judg- 
ment in error. Some accident may 
have happened, some untoward devel- 
opment in a particular issue, of suffi- 
cient weight to affect the rest of the 
list It is these unknown quantities 



Stop Orders, Trading Rules, ftc. 

that make the limitation of losses 

most important. In such a case it 

would be folly to change the $top so 

that the risk is increased. This, while 

customary with the public, is some- ^ . 

Aing a Tape Reader seldom does. of^Rit?**** 

Each trade is made on its own basis, 

and for certain definite reasons. At 

the outset the amount of risk should 

be decided upon, and, except in very 

rare instances, should not be changed, 

except on the side of profit. The Tape 

Reader must eliminate, not increase his 

risk. 

Averaging does not come within the 
province of the Tape Reader. Aver- 
aging is groping for the top or bottom. 
The Tape Reader must not grope. He 
must see and know, or' he should not 
act. 

It is impossible to fix a rule govern- 
ing the amount of profit the operator 
should accept. In a general way, there 
should be no limit set as to the prof- 
its. A deal, when entered, may look 
as though it would yield three or four 
points, but if the strength increases 
with the advance it may run ten 
points before there is any sign of a 
halt. 

We wish our readers to bear fully in 
mind that these recommendations and 
suggestions are not to be considered final 
or inflexible. It is not our aim to as- 
sume the role of an oracle. Rather, we 
are reasoning things out on paper, and 



Tape Reading 

as we progress in these studies and apply 
these tentative rules to the tape, in actual 
or paper trading, we shall probably have 
occasion to modify some of our conclu- 
sions. 

Cloting A Tape Reader must close a trade 

Trades (1) when the tape tells him to close; 

(2) when his stop is caught; (3) when 
his position is not clear; (4) when he 
has a large or satisfactory profit. 

The first and most important reason 
for closing a trade is: The tape says 
so. This indication may appear in va- 
rious forms. Assuming that one is 
trading in a leader like Union Pacific 
or Reading, the warning may come in 
the stock itself. Within the ribbon of 
sales recorded on the tape, there runs 
the fine silken thread of the trend. It 
is clearly distinguishable to one suffi- 
ciently versed in the art of Tape 
Reading, and, for reasons previously 
explained, is most readily observed in 
the leaders. Hence, when one is short 
of Union Pacific and this thread sud- 
denly indicates that the market has 
turned upward, it is folly to remain 
short. Not only must one cover (}uicld^, 
but if the power of the movement is suffi- 
cient to warrant the risk, the operator 
must go long. In a market of sufficient 
breadth and swing, the Tape Reader will 
find that when it is time to close a trade, 
it is usually time to reverse his position. 
One must have the flexibility of whale- 



Stop Orden» Timding Rules, ftc. 

bone, and entertain no rigid opinion. He Obey the 
must obey the tape implicitly. '^•P* 

The indication to close a trade may 
come fro^ another stock, several 
stocks or die general market. For ex- 
ample, on the day of the Supreme Court 
decision in Consolidated Gas, suppose 
the operator was long of Union Pacific 
at 11 o'clock, having paid therefor 
182>4. 

Between 11 and 12 o'clock Union 
rallied to 183>^, and Reading, which 
was more active, to 144. Just before, 
and immediately after, the noon hour, 
tremendous transactions took place in 
Reading, over 50,000 shares changing 
hands within three-quarters of a point. 
These may have been largely wash 
sales, accompanied by inside selling; 
it is impossible to teU. If they were 
not, the inference is that considerable 
buying power developed in Reading at 
this level and was met by selling 
heavy enough to supply all bidders 
and prevent the stock advancing above 
144^. Large quantities coming within 
a small range indicated either one of two 
things: (1) That considerable buying 
power suddenly developed at this point, 
and the insiders chose to check it or to 
take advantage of the op|>ortunity to 
unload. (2) The demonstration in Read- volSiee 
ing may have been intended to distract 
attention from other stocks in which 
large operators were unloading. (There 



Tape Reading 

was no special evidence of this, except 
in New York Central.) 

If the selling was not sufficient to 

check the upward move, the market for 

A §**^ Reading would have absorbed all that 

to Reading ^^^ offered and advance to a higher 

level, but in this case the selling was 
more effectual than the buying, and 
Reading fell back, warning the operator 
that the temporary leader on the bull 
side of the market had met with defeat. 

If a stock or the whole market cannot 
be advanced, the assumption is that it 
will decline — a market seldom stands 
still. At this point the operator was, 
therefore, on the lookout for a slump. 

Reading subsided, in small lots, back 
to 143Ji. Union Pacific, after selling 
at 183^, declined to ISS^. Both 
stocks developed dullness, and the 
whole market became more or less 
without feature. 

Suddenly Union Pacific came 183>^. 
500.183,200.182^,500.^, indicating not 
only a lack of demand, but remark- 
ably poor support. Immediately fol- 
lowing this. New York Central, which 
sold only a few minutes before 400.- 
13154 came 131,1700.130>^,600.130. 
This demonstrated that the market was 
remarkably hollow and in a position to 
develop great weakness. The large quan- 
tities of New York Central at the low 
figure, after a running decline of a point 
and one-half, showed that there was not 



Stop Orders, Trading Rules, ftc. 

only an absence of supporting orders, but 
that sellers were obliged to make great 
concessions in order to dispose of their 
holdings. The quantities, especially in 
view of the narrowness of the market, 
proved that the sellers were not small 
fry. 

Coupled with the wet blanket put on 
Reading and the poor support in Union 
Pacific, this weakness in New York 
Central was another advance notice of 
a decline. On any indication of this 
kind, the operator must be ready to jump 
out of his long stock and get short of the 
market. 

While waiting for his cue, the Tape 
Reader has time to consider which 
stock among the leaders is the most 
desirable for selling. He quickly 
chooses Reading, on the ground that 
the large lots which have apparently 
been distributed around 144 will prob- 
ably come into the market as soon as 
weakness develops. Reason: The 
outside public generally buys on just 
such bulges as the one which has taken 
place in Reading. A large volume, even 
if accompanied by only a fractional ad- 
vance, has the effect of making the ordi- 
nary trader intensely bullish, the result 
being that he bites off a lot of long stock 
at the top of the bulge. This is exactly 
what the manipulator wishes him to do. 
We have all heard people boast that their 
purchase was at the top eighth and that 
it had the effect of turning the stock 

—61— 



Catching 
the Cae 



Public 
Bujring 



Tape Reading 

Buying at down. Those who make their purchases 

the Top after this fashion are quickest to become 

Scared at the first appearance of weak- 
ness, and throw overboard what they 
have bought. In choosing Reading, 
therefore, the Tape Reader is picking 
out the stock in which he is hlcely to 
have the most help on the bear side. 

At 12.30 the market is standing still, 
the majority of transactions being in 
small lots and at only fractional 
changes. Reading shows the effect of 
the recent unloading. It is coming out 

600.143J4,600.5^,400.J4,54. The oper- 
ator realizes that Reading is probably 
a short sale right here, with a stop or- 
der at 144 J4 or ^, on the ground 
that the bulls must have an extraor- 
dinary amount of buying power to push 
the stock above its former top, where, 
at every eighth advance over 144J^, they 
will encounter a considerable portion of 
50,000 shares. This reasoning, however, 
is all aside from our main argument, 
which is to show how the cue to get 
out will be given by stocks other than 
that in which the operator is working. 

Union Pacific shows on the tape in 
small lots at 182J4; New York Cen- 
tral 1100.130,900.^. The rest of the 
market seems to have all the snap and 
ginger taken out of it and the operator 
does not like his position on the long 
side. He has no definite indication to 
sell short, however, but feeling that 
his chances on the long side have been 



Stop Orders, Tmding Rulct* ftc. 

reduced to practically nil by the weak 
undertone of the market, he therefore r%i^.««^ ri«* 
gets out of his Union Pacific and ^^^^^'^^ 
waits until the tape tells him to sell Read- 
ing short. 

Union Pacific weakens to 182^. 
The others slide off fractionally.' The 
weakness is not positive enough to 
forecast any big break, so he continues 
to wait. There are 1800 shares of Un- 
ion altogether at 182^, followed by 
3000 at 182>^. Other stocks respond 
and the market looks more bearish. 

Consolidated Gas comes 163^.54* 
163. This is the first sign of activity 
in the stock, but the move is nothing 
unusual for Gas, as its fluctuations are 
generally wide and erratic. The bal- 
ance of the list rallies a fraction. Gas 
comes 162^.^.500.162>^. At this 
point Gas, which has been very dull 
heretofore, now forces itself, by its de- 
cline and weakness, upon the notice of 
the operator. He begins to look upon 
the stock as the possible shears which 
will cut the thread of the market and 
let everything down. 

12.45— Gas 500.161>4. It is very Break 
weak. The balance of the list is »» ©•• 
steady, Union Pacific 182^, Central 
130^, Reading 143^. There is a 
fractional rally — Union Pacific to 
182% and Gas to 162. Plenty of Cen- 
tral for sale around 130; Reading is 
14354. 

The rally peters out. There is a 



Tape Readinc 

¥radual weakening all around, but tfie 
ape Reader cannot go with the trend 
until he is sure of a big swing. Cen- 
tral comes 129}i, showing tint after 
all the buyers at 130 are filled up ccm- 
siderable stock is still for sale. The 
others show only in small lots. The 
market is on the verge of a decline; it 
is where a jar of any sort wiU start it 
down. Union Pacific is heavy at 182^.- 
300.^.200.^, Reading 143>^.^.10005^, 
Central 2000.130.800.^. 

The Tni»t Here is the thrust he has been look- 

ing for! Gas 163^.200.^^.400.161.300. 
160^^.400.160! He waits no longer, 
but gives an order to sell Reading short 
at the market. They are all on die run 
now, Reading 143>^.600.^.1300.;4. Cen- 
tral 130.129^, Gas 500,159;^. Some- 
thing very rotten about Gas and if s a 
cinch to sell it short if you dcm't mind 
trading in a buzz-saw stock. 

The market breaks so rapidly that he 
does not get over 142^ for his Reading, 
but he is short not far from the top of 
what looks like a wide open break. 

Everything is slumping now — Steel, 
Smelters, Southern Pacific, St. Paul. 
Union Pacific is down to 181^, and the 
rest in proportion. 

Gas 168J4.168.300.157.156.156.164.153 

and the rest ''come tumbling after." 

Reading 141^.500.>^.400.141.140>^.500.- 

The Break J4.200.140.600.139^.500..>i. Union 181.- 

180?^.J4.>4.J4.600.J^.600.180.179J4.500.- 
J4 .300.54, Central 127>4. 



Stop Orders, Trading Rules, ftc. 

The above illustrates some of the 
workings of a Tape Reader's mind; 
also how a break in a stock, entirely 
foreign to that which is being traded in, 
will furnish the indication to get out and 
go short of one stock or another. 

The indication to close a trade may 
come from the general market where 
the trend is clearly developed through- 
out the list, all stocks working in com- 
plete harmony. One of the best indica- 
tions in this line is the strength or weak- 
ness on rallies and reactions. 

Of course the break in Gas, which News From 
finally touched 138, was due to the Su- *^« '^•P« 
preme Court decision, announced on the 
news tickers at 1.10 p. m., but, as is 
usually the case, the tape told the news 
many minutes before an)rthing else. This 
is one of the advantages of getting your 
news from the first place where it is 
reflected. Other people who wait for 
such information to sift through tele- 
phone and telegraph wires and reach 
them by the roundabout way of news 
tickers or word of mouth, are working 
under a tremendous handicap. 

That not even the insiders knew 
what the decision was to be is shown 
in the dullness of the stock all morn- 
ing. Those who heard the decision in 
the Supreme Court chamber doubtless 
did the double-quick to the telephone and 
sold the stock short. Their sales showed 
on the tape before the news arrived in 
New York. Tape Readers were, there- 



Tape Reading 

fore, first to be notified. They were 
short before the Street knew what had 
happened. 



V. Volume0 and Tkeir Significance 



AS the whole object of these stud- 
ies is to learn to read what the 
tape says, I will now explain a 
point which should be known and 
understood before we proceed, otherwise 
the explanations cannot be made clear. 
First of all, we must recognize that 
the market for any stock — at whatever 
level it may be — is composed of two 
sides, represented by the bid and the 
asked price. Remember that the ''last 
sale" is something entirely different from 
the "market price." If Steel has just 
sold at 50, this figure represents what 
has happened. It is history. The tnar- "Market 
ket price of Steel is either 49>i@50 or P«^ce'* 
50@50J^. The bid and asked prices ^^^^ 
combined form the market price. 

This market price is like a pair of 
scales, and the volume of stock thrown 
out by sellers and reached for by pur- 
chasers, shows toward which side the 
preponderance of weight has momen- 
tarily shifted. For example, when the 
tape shows the market price is 60(^5^, 
and the large volumes are on the up side. 

— er— 



Tape 



US 500 . 50 . 1000 . J^ . 60 . 1600 . Ji 

In these four transactions there are 700 
shares sold at 60 against 2600 taken at 
50>^, proving that at the moment the 
buying is more effective than the selling. 
The deduction to be made from this is 
that Steel will probably sell at 60^ be- 
fore 4:9 Ji, There is no certainty, for 
supply and demand is changing with 
every second, not only in Steel but in 
every other stock on the list. 
Advantage of Here is one advantage in trading in 

the Leaders ^he leaders. The influence of demand or 

pressure is first evidenced in the prin- 
cipal stocks. The hand of the dominant 
power, whether it be an insider, an out- 
side manipulator or the public, is shown 
in these volumes. The reason is sim- 
ple. The big fellows cannot put their 
stocks up or down without trading in 
large amounts. In an advancing market 
they are obliged to reach up for or bid 
up their stocks, as, for example: 



u 

182 . 


1000 . 


yi. 


200 . 182 . 


. 1500 . 


H 




200. J4 


. 3500 


■H 


. 2000 . 3^ 


• 





Take some opening trades and sub- 
sequent transactions like the following: 



-es- 



Volumes and Their Significance 

200 47^ 100 45% 100 45% 

1900 46% 100 46% 100 46 

100 46% 100 46 600 45% 

100 46% 200 46% 500 45% 

100 46% 100 46% 200 45% 

600 46% 11A.M. 100 45% 

100 46% 300 46% 100 45% 

600 46 100 46% 400 45% 

100 45% 100 46 100 45% 

200 45% 100 45% 400 45% 

100 46 100 46 100 45% 

Here the opening market price was 
46 J4 @ 47 J4, and the buyers of 200 
shares "at the market" paid the high 
price. All bids at 46 J4 were then filled. 
This is proved by the next sale, which is 
at 465^. The big lots thereafter are 
mostly on the down side, showing that 
pressure still existed. The indications 
were, therefore, that the stock would go 
lower. A lot of 1900 shares in some 
stocks would be a large quantity; in 
others insignificant. These points have 
a relative value with which traders must 
familiarize themselves. 

Volumes must be considered in propor- Volumes as 
tion to the activity of the market, as well Indicators 
as the relative activity of that particu- 
lar issue. No set rule can be established. 
I have seen a Tape Reader make money 
by following the lead of a 1000-share 
lot of Northwest which someone took at 
a fraction above the last sale. Ordinarily 
Northwest is a sluggish investment stock, 
and this size lot appeared as the fore- 
runner of an active speculative demand. 

Now let us see what happens on the 
floor to produce the above-described ef- 



Tap« Reading 

feet on the tape. Let us prove that our 
theory is correct. A few years ago the 
control of a certain railroad was being 
bought on the floor of the New York 
Stodc Exchange. One house was given 
all the orders, with instructions to dis- 
tribute them and conceal the buying as 
much as possible. The original order 
for the day would read, "Take every- 
thing that is offered up to 38." As 38 
was about 3 points above the market of 
the day before, this left considerable lee- 
way for the broker to whom the buying 
order was entrusted. 

He would instruct his floor broker as 
follows: "The stock closed last night 
at 35. You take everything offered up 
to S5yi and then report to me how 
things stand. Don't bid for the stock; 
just take it as it is offered and mark it 
down whenever you can." 

In such a case the floor member stands 
Qn ^^ in the crowd awaiting the opening. On 

Floor the instant of ten o'clock the chairman's 

gavel strikes and the crowd begins yell- 
ing. Someone offers "Two thousand at 
an eighth." Another broker says "Thirty- 
five for five hundred." Our broker takes 
the 2000 at ^, then offers one hundred 
at one-eighth himself, so as to keep the 
price down. Others also offer one or 
two hundred shares at ^, so he with- 
draws his offer, as he wishes to accumu- 
late and only offers or sells when it helps 
him buy more, or puts the price down. 
The buyer at 35 has 300 shares of his 



Volumes and Their Significance 

lot cancelled, so he alters his bid to 
"thirty-five for two hundred." The other 
sellers supply him and he then bids "}i 
for a hundred." Our broker sells him 
100 at J4 just to get the price down. 
Someone comes in with "a thousand at 
five." Our broker says, "I'll take it." 
Five hundred more is offered at J^. This 
he also takes. 

Let us see how the tape records these 
transactions : 



2000 . 35^ . 3500 . 35 . 3^Ji . 1000 . 35 . 



500 . }i 



The Tape Reader interprets this: 
Opening bid and asked price was 35@ 
}i ; someone took the large lot at the 
high price. The two sales following 
were in small lots, showing light pres- 
sure. The 1000@35 after 34:Ji shows 
that on the J^@5 market the buyer took 
the stock at the offered price and fol 
lowed it up by taking 500 more at the 
eighth. The demand is dominant and it 
does not matter whether the buyer is one 
individual or a dozen, the momentary 
trend is upward. 

To get the opposite side, let us suppose Marking 
that a manipulator is desirous of depress- Down 
ing a stock. This can be accomplisheti 
by offering and selling more than there 
is a demand for, or by coaxing or fright- 
ening other holders into throwing over 

— n— 



Tape Reading 

their shares. It makes no difference 
whose stock is sold; "The Lord is on 
the side of the heaviest battalions/' as 
Addison Cammock used to say. When 
a manipulator puts a broker into a crowd 
with orders to mark it down, the broker 
supplies all bids and then offers it down 
to the objective point or until he meets 
resistance too strong for him to overcome 
without the loss of a large block of 
stock. 

The stock in question is selling around 
80, we will say, and the broker's orders 
are to "put it to 77." Going into the 
crowd, he finds 600 wanted at 79% and 
300 offered at 80. Last sale, 100 at 80. 
How It "I'll sell you that five hundred at sev- 

is Done en-eighths. A thousand or any part at 

three-quarters," he shouts. 

"I'll take two hundred at three-quar- 
ters," says another broker. "A half for 
five hundred," is heard. "Sold!" is the 
response. "A half for five hundred 
more." "Sold!" "That's a thousand I 
sold you at a half. Five hundred at 
three-eighths !" 

"I'll take a hundred at three-eighths," 
comes a voice. 

"You're on!" is the reply. 

"Quarter for five hundred." 

"Sold!" is the quick response. 

His pounding of the stock would re- 
veal itself on the tape as follows : 

80 . 500 . 79Ji . 200 . M 



1000 .y2.H'^^^'^A 

—72— 



Tape Reading 

If he met strong resistance at 79 it 
would appear on the tape something like 
this. 



79H 


.1000 


. 79. 


, 500. 


79. 


800 


.79. 


300 




■ H . 


1000 . 


79 . 


. 600 


■ Va 


. H . 


200 


• Ka 



showing that at 79 there was a demand Resistance 
for more than he was willing to supply. 
(There might have been 10,000 shares 
wanted at 79.) 

Frequently a broker meeting such an 
obstacle will leave the crowd long enough 
to 'phone his principal. His departure 
opens the way for a rally, as the stock 
is no longer under pressure, and the large 
buying order at 79 acts as a back log 
for floor traders. So those in the crowd 
bid it up to yi in hopes of scalping a 
fraction on the long side. 

Take another case where two brokers 
are put into the crowd — one to depress 
the stock and the other to accumulate it. 
They play into each other's hands, and 
the tape makes the following report of 
what happens: 



80^ 


. 80 


. 20( 


) .79yA . 


Va- 


1000 . 


H- 


Va- 


200 . 


H. 


500 . }i 


. 30C 


1- M ■ 


A- 


H- 


1500 


.'A. 


H . 500 


■ Va ■ 


A- 





Volttmes and Their Significance 

Were we on the floor we should see 
one broker offering the stock down, 
while the other grabbed every round lot 
that appeared. We cannot tell how far 
down die stock will be put, but when 
these indications appear it makes us 
watch closely for the turning point, which 
is our time to buy. 

The Tape Reader does not care 
whether a move is made by a manipula- 
tor, a group of floor traders, the public 
or a combination of all. 

The figures on the tape represent the 
consensus of opinion, the effect of manip- 
ulation and the supply and demand, all 
combined. That is why tape indications 
are more reliable than whkt anyone hears, 
knows or thinks. 

A Pair With the illustration of the pair of 

of Scales scales clearly implanted in our minds, we 

scan the tape, mentally weighing each 
indication in our effort to learn on which 
side the tendency is strongest. Not a 
detail must escape our notice. A sud- 
den demand or a burst of liquidation may 
enable us to form a new plan, revise an 
old one or prompt us to assume a neu- 
tral attitude. 

These volume indications are not al- 
ways clear. Nor are they infallible. It 
does not do to rely upon the indications 
of any one stock to the exclusion of the 
rest. There are times when certain 
stocks are rushed up, while volume indi- 
cations in other active stocks show clearly 
that they are being distributed as fast 

—74— 



Tap« Reading 

as the market will take them. This hap- 
pens frequently on a large or small scale. 
Especially is it apparent at the turning 
point of a big swing, where accumula- 
tion or distribution requires some days 
to complete. 

Volumes can be studied from the re- Home 
ports printed in the New York Evening Study of 
Sun or the Wall Street Journal, but the Volumei 
real way to study them is from the tape. 
If one is unable to spend five hours a 
day at the tape while the ticker is in op- 
eration, he can arrange with one of the 
boys in his broker's office to wind the 
tape up each day and save it for him. 
This is done most expeditiously by using 
an automatic reel, which can be had at 
any electrical supply store. The tape 
can then be taken home and studied at 
leisure. A second reel in the study makes 
it easy to unwind, after which the tape 
can be made to run across one's desk 
just as though it were coming from the 
ticker. 

In studying under these conditions do 
not let yourself be deceived as to your 
ability to make money on paper. Imag- 
inary trades prove nothing. The way to 
test your powers is to get into the game. 
Let it be on as small a scale as you like, 
but make actual trades with real money. 

There are times when the foregoing 
rule of volumes indicates almost the re- 
verse of what we have explained. One 
of these instances was described in our 
last chapter. In this case the trans- 



Tape Readinc 

700... 143% 

500... 143% 
5000... 143% 
1700... 143% 

200... 143% 
4300... 143% 
3700... 143% 

100... 144 
12 M. 
5000.. .144 
1300... 143% 
3000. ..144 
5000... 144% 
2100... 144% 
2200. . . 144% 
3500... 144% 
4000... 144% 
3000... 144% 
2500... 144% 
3500... 144 

400... 144% 
1000... 144 

500... 144% 
1100... 144 
2000... 143% 
2500... 143% 
1000... 143% 
Turning Point in Reading, morning of 
Jan. 4, 1909— the day of the Con- 
solidated Gas collapse 

actions in Reading suddenly swelled out 
of all proportion to the rest of the mar- 
ket and its own previous volume. Not- 
withstanding the predominance of ap- 
parent demand, the resistance offered 
(whether legitimate or artificial) became 
too great for the stock to overcome, and 
it fell back from 144^. On the way 
up these volumes suggested a purchase, 
but the tape showed abnormal transac- 
Poor tions, accompanied by poor response 

Response from the rest of the list. This smacked 



Volumes and Their Significance 

of manipulation and warned the operator 
to be cautious on the bull side. The 
large volume in Reading was sustained 
even after the stock reacted, but the 
large lots were evidently thrown over at 
the bid prices. On the way up the vol- 
umes were nearly all on the up side and 
the small lots on the down side. After 
1445^ was reached the large lots were 
on the down side and the small lots on 
the up. 

It is just as important to study the 
small as the large lots. The smaller 
quantities are like the feathers on an 
arrow — they indicate that the business 
part of the arrow is at the other end. In 
other words, the smaller lots keep one 
constantly informed as to what fraction 
forms the other side of the market. To 
illustrate : During the first five trades in 
Reading, recorded above, the market 
quotation is shown to have been ^@}i ; 
it then changed to ^oe^ and again to 
J^@4. On the way down it got to be 

'^@}if ^nd ^^ ^^is l^v^l ^^^ small lots 
were particularly valuable in showing 
the pressure which existed. 

Stocks like Union, Reading and Steel 
usually make this sort of a turning point 
on a volume of from 25,000 to 50,000 
shares. That is, when they meet with 
opposition on an advance or a decline it 
must be in some such quantity in order 
to stem the tide. 

Walk into the hilly country and you 
will find a small rivulet running quietly 

—77— 



The Small 
Lots 



Volumes at 

Turning 

Points 



Tape 

on its way. The stream is so tiny that 
you can place your hand in its course 
and the water will back up. In five 
minutes, it overcomes this resistance 
by going over or around your hand. 
You fetch a shovel, pile dirt in its path, 
pack it down hard and say, "There, I've 
dammed you." But you haven't at all, 
for the next day you find your pile of 
dirt washed away. You bring cartloads 
of dirt and build a substantial dam, and 
the flow is finally held in check. 

Line of It is the same with an individual stock 

ReSstance ^^ *^^ market. Prices follow the line of 

least resistance. If Reading is going up 
someone may throw 10,000 shares in its 
path without perceptible effect. Another 
lot of 20,000 shares follows; the stock 
halts, but finally overcomes the obstacle. 
The seller gives another order — ^this time 
30,000 shares more are thrown on the 
market. If there are 30,100 shares 
wanted at that level, the buyer will 
absorb all of the 30,000 and the stock 
will go higher ; if only 29,900 shares are 
needed to fill all bids, the price will 
recede because demand has been over- 
come by supply. 

It looks as though something like this 
happened in Reading on the occasion re- 
ferred to. Whether or not manip- 
ulative orders predominated does not 
change the aspect of the case. In the 
final test the weight was on the down 
side. 

—78— 



I- 











■a 






in 



Volumes and Their Significance 

When a streain breaks through a dam 
it goes into new territory. Likewise the 
breaking through of a stock is signifi- 
cant, for it means that the resistance has 
been overcome. The stronger the resist- 
ance the less likelihood of finding 
further obstacles in the immediate vi- 
cinity. Dams are not usually built one 
behind the other. So when we find a 
stock emerging into a new field it is best 
to go with it, especially if, in breaking 
through it, it carries the rest of the 
market along. 

While much can be learned from the 
reports printed in the dailies mentioned ^ ^^^* "^"P* 
above, the tape itself is the only real in- 
struction book. A live tape is to be pre- 
ferred, for the element of speed with 
which the ticker prints is no small 
factor. 

The comparative activity of the mar- 
ket on bulges and breaks is a guide to 
the technical condition of the market. 
For instance, during a decline, if the 
ticker is very active and the volume of 
sales large, voluntary or compulsory 
liquidation is indicated. This is empha- 
sized if, on the subsequent rally, the tape 
moves sluggishly and only small lots ap- 



Tape Reading 

pear. In an active bull market the tidcer 
appears to be choked with the volumje of 
sales poured through it on the advances, 
but on reactions the quantities and the 
number of impressions decrease until, 
like the ocean at ebb tide, the market is 
almost lifeless. 

Another indication of the power of a 
movement is found in the differences be- 
tween sales of active stocks, for example: 

1000 . 180 . 5^ . 500 . }i. 1000 . J4 

This shows that there was only 100 

shares for sale at 180 J^, none at all at 

Jumps 180J4, and only 500 at UBO^. The jump 

from J^ to J^ emphasizes both the ab- 
sence of pressure and persistency on the 
part of the buyers. They are not con- 
tent to wait patiently until they can se- 
cure the stock at 180 J4 ;, they "reach" 
for it. On the opposite side this would 
show lack of support. 

Each indication is to be judged not so 
much by rule as according to the condi- 
tions surrounding it. The tape furnishes 
a continuous series of motion pictures, 
with their respective explanations writ- 
ten between the printings. These are in 
a language which is foreign to all but 
Tape Readers. 



Volumes and Their Significance 



Warning 

A NUMBER of people who have 
read previous editions of this 
book have been misled by the 
apparent ease with which some 
kinds of markets may be read by means 
of the volumes. They have erroneously 
come to the conclusion that all one has 
to do is sit beside a ticker and observe 
which side the volumes are on — ^the buy- 
ing or the selling side. 

This is a great mistake. Owing to 
changes in the rules of the New York 
Stock Exchange since the original issue 
of this book appeared, the value of these 
volume indications is not as great as be- 
fore. Under the old rule a buyer who 
desired to influence the market in an 
upward direction could bid for 10,000 
shares or any other very large quantity, 
and no one could sell, him any less than 
the quantity bid for, unless the buyer 
was willing to take it. Under the pres- 
ent rules, the buyer is obliged to take 
any part of 10,000 shares, or whatever 
quantity he bid for. 

This revision of the rules, and the 
other restrictions against matched orders, 
manipulations, etc., eliminates a very 
large number of transactions in big quan- 
tities at the advanced or the decreased 
price. It was an old trick of Harriman's 
and some of the old Standard Oil party, 



Tape Reading 

as well as other minor manipulators and 
floor traders, to make these bids and 
offers in rotmd lots ^d have some one 
else supply or take them for its effect 
on the market. But the change in the 
rules has greatly reduced the volume and 
decreased the value of these indications-. 
Hence, while they are still very sugges- 
tive to an observant tape reader, and 
while the principle is unchanged, it will 
not do to depend on them entirely. 



The volumes which we have been dis- 
cussing are least liable to mislead when 
Effect of manipulation prevails, for the manipula- 

Manipulation ^^^ ^^ obliged to deal in large blocks of 

stock, and must continually show his 
hand. A complete manipulative opera- 
tion on the long side consists of three 
parts: (1) Accumulation, (2) marking 
up, and (3) distribution. In the case of 
a short operation the distribution comes 
first, then the mark down and the accu- 
mulation. No one of these three sections 
is complete without the other two. (For 
full details see my series on Manipula- 
tions in Vols. 1 and 2 of The Magazine 
of Wall Street.) 

The manipulator must work with a 
large block of stock or the deal will not 
be worth his time, the risk and expenses. 
The Tape Reader must, therefore, be on 
the lookout for extensive operations on 
either side of the market. Accumulation 
will show itself in the quantities and in 



Volumet and Their Significance 

the way they appear on the tape. Hav- 
ing detected the accumulation, the Tape 
Reader has only to watch its progress, 
holding himself in readiness to take on 
some of the stock the moment the mark- 
ing-up period begins. He does not b^y 
it at once, because it may take weeks or 
months for the manipulator to complete 
his line, and there might be opportuni- 
ties to buy cheaper. By holding off until 
the psychological moment he forces 
someone else to carry the stock for him 
— to pay his interest. Furthermore, his 
capital is left free in the meantime. 

When the marking up begins he gets 
in at the commencement of the move, 
and goes along with it till there are 
signs of a halt or distribution. Having ^^^ p 
passed through the first two periods, he chological 
is in a position to fully benefit by the Moment 
third stage of the operation. In this sort 
of work a figure chart, which I described 
in another chapter, will help him, espe- 
cially if the manipulative operation is 
continued over a considerable period. It 
will give him a bird's-eye view of the 
deal, enabling him to drop or resume the 
thread at any stage. 







VI. Market TecLnique 

N Saturday morning, February 
27, 1909, the market opened 
slightly higher than the previous 
night's close. Reading was the 
most active stock. After touching 123}^ 
it slid off to 122 J4, at which point it 
invited short sales. This indication was 
emphasized at 122, at 121>^ and again 
at 121. The downward trend was strongly 
marked until it struck 119^; then fol- 
lowed a quick rally of 1% points. 

This was a vicious three-point jab 
into a market which was only just re- 
covering from the February break. 
S^ng What was its effect on the other prin- 

Renitance ^jp^^j stocks? Union Pacific declined 

only }i, Southern Pacific ^ and Steel 
^. This proved that they were tech- 
nically strong; that is, they were in 
hands which could view with equanim- 
ity a three-point break in a leading 
issue. Had this drive occurred when 
Reading was around 145 and Union 185 
the effect upon the others would probably 
have been very different. 



Market Technique 

In order to determine the extent of 
an ore body, miners use a diamond 
drill. This produces a core, the char- 
acter of which shows what is beneath 
the surface. If it had been possible to 
have drilled into the market at the top 
of the foregoing rise, we should have FloatiiiK 
found that the bulk of the floating sup- Supply 
ply in Steel, Reading and some others 
was held by a class of traders who buy 
heavily in booms and on bulges. These 
people operate with comparatively 
small margins, nerve and experience. 
They are exceedingly vulnerable, hence 
the stocks in which they operate suffer 
the greatest declines when the market 
receives a jar. The figures are inter- 
esting. 

^Points Per cent. 



1907-9 Feb'y, '09 of break 

Advance. Break, to adv. 

U. P....84^ 12H 14.7 

Reading .'TSJi 26}i 33.6 

Steel ...36}i 16>4 44.6 

The above shows that the public waa 
heavily extended in Steel, somewhat 
less loaded with Reading, and was car- 
rying very little Union Pacific. In 
other words, Union showed technical 
strength by its resistance to pressure, 
whereas Reading and Steel offered lit- 
tle or no opposition to the decline. 

Both the market as a whole and indi- 
vidual stocks are to be judged as much 
by what they do as what they do not 




TZTBOH^iStiich had 



1% 

w 

k 

I 



sti;: 



lS:i 



fe':;: 
S«;:: 



". — * ,-«..-«P^I*"' 







1 



II 






Tape 

do at critical points. If the big fellows 

who accumulated Union below 120 had 

distributed it above 180, the stock would 

Technical have broken something like thirty 

Conditions points, owing to its having passed from 

strong to weak hands. As it did not 
have any such decline, but only a very 
small reaction compared to its advance, 
the Tape Reader infers that Union is 
destined for much higher prices; that it 
offers comparative inmiunity from de- 
clines and a possible large advance in the 
near future. 

Even were Union Pacific scheduled 
for a thirty-point rise in th? following 
two weeks, something might happen to 
postpone the campaign for a consider- 
able time. But the Tape Reader must 
work with these broader considerations 
in full view. He has just so much time 
and capital, and this must be employed 
where it will yield the greatest results. 
If by watching for the most favorable 
opportunities he can operate with the 
trend in a stock which will some day 
or week show him ten points profit more 
than any other issue he could have 
chosen, he is increasing his chances to 
that extent. 

A long advance or decline usually 
culminates in a wide, quick movement 
in the leaders. Take the break of Feb- 
ruary 23, 1909: Reading declined from 
12854 to 118 and Steel from 46 to 41 >4 
in one day. Southern Pacific, after 
creeping up from 97 to 112, reached a 
climax in a seven-point jump during one 



Market Technique 

session. Instances are so numerous that 

they are hardly worth citing. The same 

thing happens in the market as a whole 

— ^an exceptionally violent movement, Culminations 

after a protracted sag or rise, usually 

indicates its culmination. 

A stock generally shows the Tape 
Reader what it proposes to do by its 
action under pressure or stimulation. 
For example: On Friday, February 
19, 1909, the United States Steel Cor- 
poration announced an open market in 
steel products. The news was out. 
Everybody in the country knew it .by 
the following morning. The Tape 
Reader, in weighing the situation before 
the next day's opening, would reason: 
"As the news is public property, the 
normal thing for Steel and the market 
to do is to rally. Steel closed last night 
at 48^. The market hinges upon tnis 
one stock. Let's see how it acts." 



ll.y.STOCK,EXCHANCE.F£B 

2 0. 1909 



1 



faS.flPIlD fo\ 

I g000>4?i 47fl 

The opening price of U. S. Steel, as 
shown by these reproductions of the 
original tape, was three-quarters of a 
point down from the previous closing — 
a perfectly natural occurrence in view 
of the announcement. The real test of 



Tape Reading 

strength or weakness will follow. For 
the first ten minutes Steel shows on the 
tape: 



200 . i7}i . 4600 . )i . 1200 . Ji . 1600 . }i 

without otherwise varying. 

Eighteen times the price swings back 
and forth between the same fractions. 
Meantime, Union Pacific, which opened 
at 1775^, shows a tendency to rall^ and 
pull the rest of the market up behmd it. 

W00il78,mi.<00.ii200»l?8j./00.g\ 

An Interest. Can Union lift Steel? That is the 

ing Contest question. Here are two opposing forces, 

and the Tape Reader watches like a 
hawk, for he is "going with the market" 
— in the direction of the trend. Union is 
up }i from the opening and Southern 
Pacific is reinforcing it. 

[jJ AR SP \ 

\ 500.l«f Mi 1188 .500.4 \ 

But Steel does not respond. Not once 
does it p^et out of that H^Ji rut — ^not 
even a smgle hundred shares sells at 48. 
This proves that it is freely offered at 
47^ and that it possesses no rallying 
power, in spite ot the leadership dis- 
played by the Harrimans. 



lUricet Technique 

\SaVM 200.118; (500.«7i\ 



Union seems to make a final effort to 
induce a following: 



to which Steel replies by breaking 
through with a thud. 



\800i4/|.|\ 



This is the Tape Reader's cue to go The Signal 
short. In an instant he has put out a 
line of Steel for which he gets 47J4 or 
4:7 }i, as there are large volumes traded 
in at those figures. 

Union Pacific seems disheartened. The 
Steel millstone is hanging round its neck. 
It slides off to 178^.^.;^ and finally to 



\U G .CO US I 

l«lDJ78>4(X),t77i300tm> 66 ^Otk^^f\ 



The pressure on Steel increases at the 
low level. 



Tape Reading 

Tiiii ii? \ir\ 

( 350D.47t 48, 1. f 081 47ft 
Successive sales are made, as follows. 

6800 . 4734 . 2600 . ^ . 500 . J4 . 8800 . 

Liquidatioii i^. From this time on there is a steady 

flow of long stock all through the list. 
Reading and Pennsylvania are the weak- 
est railroads. Colorado Fuel breaks seven 
points in a running decline and the other 
steel stocks follow suit. U. S. Steel is 
dumped in bunches at the bid prices, and 
even the dignified preferred is sympa- 
thetically affected. 

^8 PR \ 

? 500»4B| ,35DD»I 2QD,IIDt«200ti.lB00,|ICi 

At the end of the two-hour session, 
the market closes at the bottom, with 
Steel at 46, leaving thousands of ac- 
counts weakened by the decline and a 
holiday ahead for holders to worry over. 

It looks to the Tape Reader as though 
the stock would go lower on the fol- 
lowing Tuesday. At any rate, no cov- 
ering indication has appeared, and un- 
less it is his invariable rule to close 
every trade each day, he puts a stop at 
47 on his short St«el and goes his way. 
(His original stop was 485^.) 



Market Technique 

Steel opens on the following session 
at 44^ @J^, and during the day makes 
a low record of 41J4. 

A number of lessons may be drawn 
from this episode: Successful tape 
reading is a study of Force; it requires 
ability to judge which side has the great- 
est pulling power and one must have the 
courage to go with that side. There are 
critical points which occur in each swing, 
just as in the life of a business or of an 
individual. At these junctures it seems 
as though a feather's weight on either 
side would determine the immediate 
trend. Any one who can spot these 
points has much to win and little to lose, 
for he can always play with a stop placed 
close behind the turning point or "point 
of resistance." 

If Union had continued in its upward 
course, gaining in power, volume and 
influence as it progressed, the dire ef- 
fects of the Steel situation might have 
been overcome. It was simply a ques- 
tion of power, and Steel pulled Union 
down. 

This study of responses is one of the 
most valuable in the Tape Reader's edu- 
cation. It is an almost unerring guide 
to the technical position of the market. 
Of course, all responses are not clearly 
defined. 

It is a matter of indifference to the 
Tape Reader as to who or what pro- 
duces these tests, or critical periods. 
They constantly appear and disappear; 



Critical 
Points 



ResponsM 




l-'fr' 




f«^:^ii 




^^•^•j 




[fiisii 
















Sil:! 








jS-gZi 




ii-ffL. 





Market Technique 

rumors originated with the insiders, for 
he admitted that the transactions at the 
time were inscrutable. Perhaps they 
were inscrutable to a person inexperi- 
enced in tape reading, but we well re- 
member that the indications were all in 
favor of buying the stock on the break. 
The transactions were very large— out 
of all proportion to the capital stock 
outstanding and the floating supply. 
What did this mean to the Tape 
Reader? Thousands of shares of stock 
were traded in per day, after a ten- 
point decline and a small rally. If the 
volume of sales represented long stock, 
some one was there to buy it. If there 
was manipulation it certainly was not 
for the purpose of distributing the stock 
at such a low level. So, by casting out 
the unlikely factors, a tape reader could 
have arrived at the correct conclusioa 

The market is being put to the test Floor 
continually by one element of which Traders 
little has been said, viz., the floor tra- 
ders. These shrewd fellows are always 
on the alert to ferret out a weak spot 
in the market, for they love the short 
side. Lack of support, if detected, in 
an issue generally leads to a raid which, 
if the technical situation be weak, 
spreads to other parts of the floor and 
produces a reaction or a slump all 
around. Or, if they find a vulnerable 
short interest, they are quick to bid 
up a stock and drive the shorts to cover. 
With these and other operations going 



Tape Reading 

on all the time, the Tape Reader who 
is at all expert is seldom at a loss to 
know on which side his best chances lie. 
Other people are doing for him what he 
would do himself if he were all-power- 
ful. 

The Broad While it is the smaller swings that 

Movementa interest him most, the Tape Reader must 

not fail to keep his bearings in relation 
to the broader movements of the mar- 
ket. When a panic prevails he recog- 
nized it in the birth of a bull market 
and operates with the certainty that 
prices will gradually rise until a boom 
marks the other extreme of the swing. 
In a bull market he considers ructions 
of from two to five points normal and 
reasonable. He looks for occasional 
drops of 10 to 15 points in the leaders, 
with a 25-point break at least once a 
year. When any of these occur, he 
knows what to look for next. 

In a bull market he expects a drop of 
10 points to be followed by a recovery 
of about half the decline, and if the 
rise is to continue, all of the drop and 
more will be recovered. If a stock or 
the market refuses to rally naturally, he 
knows that the trouble has not been 
overcome, and therefore looks for a 
further decline. 

Take American Smelters, which made 
a top at 99^ a few years ago, then 
slumped off under rumors of competi- 
tion until it reached 78. Covering in- 
dications appeared around 79}^. Had 



Market Technique 

the operator also gone long here, he 
could confidently have expected Smel- 
ters to rally to about 89. The decline 
having been 21^ points, there was a 
rally of 10^ points due. As a matter 
of record the stock did recover to 89 J^. 

Of course, these things are mere CShiide Posts 
guide posts, as the Tape Reader's actual 
trading is done only on the most posi- 
tive and promising indications; but they 
are valuable in teaching him what to 
avoid. For instance, he would be wary 
about making an initial short sale of 
Smelters after a 16-point break, even 
if his indications were clear. There 
might be several points more on the 
short side, but he would realize that 
every point further decline would bring 
him closer to the turning point, and 
after such a violetit break the safest 
money was on the long side. 

Another instance: Reading sold on 
January 4, 1909, at 144 J^. By the end 
of the month it touched 131 J4, and on 
February 23d broke ten points to 118. 
This was a decline of 24^ points, allow- 
ing for the 2 per cent, dividend. As 
previously stated, the stock looked like 
an attractive short sale, not only on the 
first breakdown, but on the final drive. 
The conservative trader would have 
waited for a buying indication, as there 
would have been less risk on the long 
side. 

It is seldom that tthe market runs 
more than three or four consecutive days 



Napoleon'p 
Maxim 



Science and 
SkUl 



Tape Reading 

in one direction without a reaction, hence 
the Tape Reader must realize that his 
chances decrease as the swing is pro- 
longed. 

The daily movements offer his best 
opportunities; but he must keep in 
stocks which swing wide enough to en- 
able him to secure a profit. As Napoleon 
said : "The adroit man profits by every- 
thing, neglects nothing which may in- 
crease his chances." 

I once knew a speculator who bought 
and sold by the clock. He had no idea 
of the hourly swing, but would buy at 
12 o'clock, because it was 12 o'clock, 
and would sell at 2 o'clock, for the same 
reason. 

The methods employed by the aver- 
age outside speculator are not so very 
much of an improvement on this, and 
that is why so many lose their money. 

The expert Tape Reader is diametri- 
cally opposed to such people and their 
methods. 

He applies science and skill in his 
angling for profits. 

He studies, figures, analyzes and de- 
duces. He knows exactly where he 
stands, what he is doing and why. 

Few people are willing to go to the 
very bottom of things. Is it any won- 
der that success is for the few ? 



—100— 



VII. DuU Markets and Heir 

Opportunities 

MANY people are apt to regard a 
dull market as a calamity. 
They claim: "Our hands are 
tied; we can't get out of what 
we've got; if we could there'd be no use 
getting in again, for whatever we do we 
can't make a dollar." 

Such people are not Tape Readers. 
They are Sitters. They are Billikens 
ex-grin. 

As a matter of fact, dull markets of- 
fer innumerable opportunities and we '^•P* Sittcm 
have only to dig beneath the crust of 
prejudice to find them. 

Dulness in the market or in any special 
stock means that the forces capable of 
influencing it in either an upward or a 
downward direction have temporarily 
come to a balance. The best illustration 
is that of a clock which is about run 
down — ^its pendulum gradually decreases 
the width of its swings until it comes to 
a complete standstill, thus: 



Tape Reading 



Nature's 
Remedy 




How the market pendulum comes to a standstill 

Turn this diagram sideways and you 
see what the chart of a stock or the mar- 
ket looks like when it reaches the point 
of dullness. 

These dull periods often occur after a 
season of delirious activity on the bull 
side. People make money, pyramid on 
their profits and glut themselves with 
stocks at the top. As every one is loaded 
up, there is comparatively no one left to 
buy, and the break which inevitably fol- 
lows would happen if there were no 
bears, no bad news or anything else to 
force a decline. 

Nature has her own remedy for dis- 
sipation. She presents the debauche 
with a thumping head and a moquette 
tongue. These tend to keep him quiet 
until the damage can be repaired. So with 
these intervals of market rest. Traders 
who have placed themselves in a posi- 
tion to be trimmed are duly trimmed. 
They lose their money and temporarily, 
their nerve. The market, therefore, be- 



Dull Markets and Their Opportunities 

comes neglected. Extreme dulness sets 
in. 

If the history of the market were to 
be written, these periods of lifelessness 
should mark the close of each chapter. 
The reason is : The factors which were 
active in producing the main movement, 
with its start, its climax and its collapse, 
have spent their force. Prices, there- 
fore, settle into a groove, where they re- 
main sometimes for weeks or until af- 
fected by some other powerful influence. 

When a market is in the midst of a big 
move, no one can tell how long or how 
far it will run. But when prices are sta- 
tionary, we know that from this point 
there will be a pronounced swing in one 
direction or another. 

There are ways of anticipating the di- J^^^f*** 
rection of this swing. One is by noting 
the technical strength or weakness of the 
market, as described in a previous chap- 
ter. The resistance to pressure men- 
tioned as characteristic of the dull period 
in March, 1909, was followed by a pro- 
nounced rise, leading stocks selling many 
points higher. This was particularly true 
of Reading, in which the shakeouts 
around 120 (one of which was described) 
were frequent and positive. When insid- 
ers shake other people out it means that 
they want the stock themselves. These 
are good times for us to get in, for then 
we will enjoy having Mr. Frick and his 
friends work for tcs. 

— lOS— 



Swing 



Tape Reading 

When a dull market shows its inabil- 
ity to hold rallies, or when it does not 
respond to bullish news, it is technically 
weak, and unless something comes along 
to change the situation, the next swing 
will be downward. 

On the other hand, when there is a 
gradual hardening in prices; when bear 
raids fail to dislodge considerable quan- 
tities of stock; when stocks do not de- 
cline upon unfavorable news, we may 
look for an advancing market in the near 
future. 

Mwkct* ^^^ .^® ^^^ ^^ *^" ^^^" ^ ^"*^ market 

will merge into a very active one ; there- 
fore the Tape Reader must be constant- 
ly on the watch. It is foolish for him 
to say: "The market is dead dull. No 
use going downtown to-day. The leaders 
only swung less than a point yesterday. 
Nothing in such a market." 

Such reasoning is apt to make one miss 
the very choicest opportunities, viz., 
those of getting in on tiie ground floor of 
a big move. For example : During the 
aforesaid accumulation in Reading, thf 
stock ranged between 120 and 124 J4. 
Without warning, it one day gave indi* 
cation (around 125) that the absorption 
was about concluded, and the stock had 
begun its advance. The Tape Reader 
having reasoned beforehand that this ac- 
cumuktion was no piker's game, would 
have grabbed a bunch of Reading as 
soon as the indication appeared. He 
might have bought more tnan he wanted 



Dull Markets and Their Opportunitiei 

for scalping purposes, with the intention 
of holding part of his line for a long 
swing, using the rest for regular trading. 

As the stock drew away from his pur- 
chase price he could have raised his stop 
on the lot he intended to hold, putting a 
mental label on it to the effect ^t it is 
to be sold when he detects inside distri^ 
bution. Thus he stands to benefit to the 
fullest extent by any manipulative work 
which may be done. In other words, he 
says : 'I'll get out of this lot when Mr. 
Frick and his friends get out of theirs." 

He feels easy in his mind about this Accumulation 
stock, because he has seen the accumu- 
lation and knows it has relieved the mar« 
ket of all the floating supply at about this 
level. 

This means a sharp, quick rise sooner 
or later, as little stock is to be met with 
on the way up. If he neglected to watch 
the market continuously and get in at 
the very start, his chances would be 
greatly lessened. He might not have the 
courage to take on the' larger quantity. 

On Friday, March 26, 1909, Reading 
and Union were about as dull as two 
gentlemanly leaders could well be. Read- 
ing opened at 132^, high was 133>^, low 
132^, last 132f$. Union's extreme fluc- 
tuation was ^— from 180^^ to 181 J4. 
Activity was conflned to Beet Sugar, 
Kansas City Southern, etc. 

The following day, Saturday, the 
opening gave every indication that the 
previous day's dulness would be repeat- 



Tape 

ed^ initial sales showing only fractional 
changes. B. & O., Wabash pfd. and 
Missouri Pacific were up ^ or >^. Union 
Was }i higher and Reading }i lower. 
Beet Sugar was down ^, with sales at 
32. 

Reading showed 1100 . 132J4 . 800 . 
^, Union 800 . 181 . 400 . 181 . 200 . ^ 
. 400 . 181. A single hundred Steel at 
45 J^. B. & O. 109^ . }i, Reading 
132>^. Beet Sugar 31^ . 400 . ^. 
Union 800 . 180^. Steel 1000 . 45. 
Beet 800 . 32. Steel 1600 . 45. Read- 
ing 1325^. Steel 44^. Market dead. 
Mostly 100-share lots. 

Reading 1600 . 132>4. Steel 400 . 45. 
Beet Sugar looks good on the bull side, 
300 . S2}i . 700 . H. Union 200 . 180^. 
Reading 500 . 132^. Union 300 . 180^. 

10.15 a. m. — ^American Sugar now re- 
sponds slightly to the strength in Beet 
Sugar. Sugar 200 . 130 ^ . 600 . 131. 
Beet 32yi . 600 . ^. This stock holds 
the spot-light. Others inanimate. 
The Cue Ah! Here's our cue! Reading 2300 

. 132>4 . 2000 . >4 . 500 . ^. Coming 
out of a dead market, quantities like 
these taken at the offered prices can 
mean only one thing, and without quib- 
bling the Tape Reader takes on a bunch 
of Reading "at the market." 

Whatever is doing in Reading, the 
rest of the market is slow to respond, 
although N. Y. Central seems willing 
to help a little— 500 . 127 1^ (after J4). 
Beets are up to 33 J4- Steel is 45 J^, 
and Copper 71J4 — ^ fraction better. 

— loe- 



Dull Markets and Their Opportunities 

Reading 300. 132>^. Steel 1300 . 
46H . }i. Union 181. Reading 300 . 
132H. Beets 33j4. Union 700 . 181^- 
N. Y. Central 127?^ . 600 . ^ . ?^. 
There's some assistance! 

Union 900 . 181 J^. Reading 132^^. 
Copper 700 . 71 J4. Reading 800 . 132 j^ 
. 133 . 900 . 133 . 1100 . }i. Central 300 
. 127.)4. Union 400 . 181^ • 300 . %. 
Reading 1500 . ISSji . 3500 . J^. Not 
much doubt about tihe trend now. The 
whole market is responding to Read- 
ing, and there is a steady increase in 
power, breadth and volume. The rap- 
id advances show that short covering 
is no small factor. Union 400 . 181^ . 
700 . >4 . 400 . H. 

It looks as though a lot of people are Getting Into 
throwing their Beet Sugar and getting Active Stocks 
into the big stocks. St. Paul Copper 
and Smelters begin to lift a little. 

Around 11 a. m. there is a brief period 
of hesitation, in which the market seems 
to take a long breath in preparation for 
another effort. There is scarcely any 
reaction and no weakness. Reading 
backs up a fraction to 133J4 and Union 
to 1815^. There are no selling indica- 
tions, so the Tape Reader stands by his 
guns. 

Now they are picking up again — 
Reading 133 J^ . yi . H - H- Union 
181^. N. Y. Central 128 J^ . 700 , J4. 
Atchison 1000 . 104>^ . 600 . 5^. North- 
em Pacific UV/i . H' Union 1000 . 
181 J4 . 3600 . ^ . 2800 . ^ . 2800 . }i 



Dull Markets and Their Opportunities 

. 4100 . 182. Steel 46>4. South'em Pa- 
cific 121. St. Paul 146. Reading 2100 . 
133% . 1100 . 134 . 1700 . X- 

From then right up to the close it's 
nothing but bull, and eyer3rthing closes 
within a fraction of its highest. Read- 
ing makes 134%, Union 183, Steel 46%, 
Central 128%, and the rest in propor- 
tion. The- market has gained such 
headway that it will take dire news to 
prevent a high, wide opening on Mon- 
day, and the Tape Reader has his choice 
of closing out at the high point or put- 
ting in a stop and taking his chances over 
Sunday. 

Breaking So we see the advantage of watching 

SncT **** * ^^ market and getting in the moment 

it starts out of its rut. One could al- 
most draw lines on the chart of a leader 
like Union or Reading (the upper line 
being the high point of its monotonous 
swing and the lower line the low point) 
and buy or sell whenever the Kite is 
crossed. For when a stock shakes itself 
loose from a narrow radius it is clear 
that the accumulation or distribution of 
resting spell has been completed and new* 
forces are at work. These forces are 
most pronounced and effective at the be- 
ginning of the new move — ^more power is 
needed to start a thing than to keep it 
going. 

Some of my readers may think I am 
giving illustrations after these things 
happen on the tape, and that what a 
Tape Reader would have done at the 



Tape Reading 

time is problematical. I therefore wish 
to state that my tape illustrations are 
taken from the indications which actually 
showed themselves when they were fresh- 
ly printed on the tape, at which time I 
did not know what was going to happen. 

There are other ways in which a trad- 
er may employ himself during dull peri- 
ods. One is to keep tab on the points 
of resistance in the leaders and play on 
them for fractional profits. This, we 
admit, is a rather precarious occupation, 
as the operating expenses constitute an 
extremely heavy percentage against the 
player, especially when the leading stocks 
only swing a point or so per day. 

But if one chooses to take these 
chances rather than be idle, the best way 
is to keep a chart on which should be 
recorded every J< fluctuation. This 
forms a picture of what is occurring and 
clearly defines the points of resistance, as 
well as the momentary trend. In the fol- 
lowing chart the stock opens at 181^ 
and the first point of resistance is ISiyi. 
The first indication of a downward trend 
is shown in the dip to lSl}i, and with 
these two straws showing tihe tendency, 
the Tape Reader goes short "at the mar-* 
kct," getting, say, 181 J^ (well give our- 
selves the worst of it). 

After making one more unsuccessful 
attempt to break thorugh the resistance 
at 181>4, the trend turns unmistakably 
downward, as shown by an almost un- xopt and 
broken series of lower tops and bottoms. Bottoms 



Dull Markets and llieir Opportunidet 



tAt 



A Double 
Stop 



i 



[|||n II 



/«/ 



i. 

a- 
ft- 



TT 



IT 



llllillll 



U0^ 



Chart •lio'wtntf pointa of rctutance in a dull market 

These indicate that the pressure is heavy 
enough to force the price to new low 
levels, and at the same time it is suffi- 
cient to prevent the rally going quite as 
high as on the previous bulge. 

At 180^ a new point of resistance ap- 
pears. The decline is checked. The 
Tape Reader must cover and go long, 
The steps are now upward and as the 
price approaches the former point of re- 
sistance he watches it narrowly for his 
indication to close out. This time, how- 
ever, there is but slight opposition to the 
advance, and the price breaks through. 
He keeps his long stock. 

In miaJdng the initial trade he placed 
a "double" stop at 181^ or }i, on the 
ground that if his stock overcame the re- 



Tape Reading 

sistance at ISiyi it would go higher and 
he would have to go with it. Being 
short 100 shares, his double stop order 
would read: "Buy 200 at 1815^ stop." 
Of course the price might just catch his 
stop and go lower. These things will 
happen, and anyone who cannot face 
them without becoming perturbed had 
better learn self control. 

After going long around the low point, 
he should place another double stop at 
180 or 179}i, for if the point of resist- 
ance is broken through after he has covr 
ered and gone long, he must switch his 
position in an instant. Not to do so 
would place him in the attitude of a 
guesser. If he is playing on this plan he 
must not dilute it with other ideas. 

Remember this method is only appli- 
cable to a very dull market, and, as we 
have said, is precarious business. We 
cannot recommend it. It will not as a 
rule pay the Tape Reader to attempt 
scalping fractions out of the leaders in 
a dull market. Commissions, tax stamps 
and the invisible eighth, in addition to 
frequent losses, form too great a handi- 
cap. There must be wide swings if prof- 
its are to exceed losses, and the thing to 
do is, wait for good opportunities. "The 
market is always with us" is an old and 
true saying. We are not compelled to 
trade and results do not depend on haw 
often we trade, but on how much money 
we make. 

There is another way of turning a dull 



f^Cft Mils ^JaBj^.«l n^t IS by 




^ .^. .'^ :p: :^: Ef: ;iP:|: ■ ■ 



- :;.*^~Eiii*i- 






I 






i 



I .' 











;i#if: 



VIII. TLe Use o{ Ckartf a« Gmdea 

and Indicators 

MANY interesting queries have 
been received by The Maga- 
zine OF Wall Street relating 
to the use of charts. The fol- 
lowing is a representative communica- 
tion : 

Referring to your figure chart ex- 
plained in Volume 1 of the Magazine 
of Wall Street, I have found it a most 
valuable aid to detecting accumulation 
or distribution in market movements. 
I have been in Wall Street a number 
of years, and like many others have al-^ 
ways shown a skeptical attitude toward 
charts and other mechanical methods 
of forecasting trends; but after a thor- 
ough trial of the chart on Union Pacific. Figure Charts 
I find that I could have made a very 
considerable sum if I had followed the 
indications shown. I note your sugges- 
tions to operators to study earnings, 
etc.» and not to rely on charts, as they 
are very often likely to mislead. I 
regret that I cannot agree with you. 
You have often stated that the tape 
tells the story; since this is true, and 

—115- 



Tape Reading 

a chart is but a copy of the tape, with 
indications of accumulation or distribu- 
tion, as the case may be, why not fol- 
low the chart entirely, and eliminate 
all unnecessary time devoted to study 
of earning, etc? 

Let us consider those portions of 
the above which relate to Tape Read- 
ing, first clearly defining the difference 
between chart operations and tape read- 
ing. 
The Chart The genuine chart player usually 

Player operates in one stock at a time, using 

as a basis the past movements of that 
stock and following a more or less def- 
inite code of rules. He treats the market 
and his stock as a machine. He uses no 
judgment as to market conditions, and 
does not consider the movements of other 
stocks; but he exercises great discretion 
as to whether he shall "play" an indica- 
tion or not. 

The Tape Reader operates on what the 
tape shows now. He is not wedded to 
any particular issue, and, if he chooses^ 
can work without pencil, paper or memo- 
randa of any sort. He also has his code 
of rules — ^less clearly defined than those 
of the chart player. So many different 
situations present themselves that his 
rules gradually become intuitive — ^a sort 
of second nature evolved by self-training 
and experience. 

A friend to whom I have given some 
points in Tape Reading once asked if 
I had my rules all down so fine that I 
knew just which to use at certain mo< 

—lie— 



The Use of Charts as Guides and Indicators 



ments. I answered him thus: When 
you cross a street where the traffic is 
heavy, do you stop to consult a set oi 
rules showing when to run ahead of a 
trolley car or when not to dodge a wagon ? 
No. You take a look both ways and at 
the proper moment you walk across. 
Your mind may be on something else but 
your judgment tells you when to start 
and how fast to walk. That is the posi- 
tion of the trained Tape Reader. 

The difference between the Chart 
Player and the Tape Reader is therefore 
about as wide as between day and night. 
But there are ways in which the Tape 
Reader may utilize charts as guides and 
indicators and for the purpose of rein- 
forcing his memory. 

The. Figure Chart is one of the best 
mechanical means of detecting accumula- 
tion and distribution. It is also valuable 
in showing the main points of resistance 
on the big swings. 

A figure chart cannot be made from 
the open, high, low and last prices, such 
as are printed in the average newspaper. 
There are but three publications from 
which such charts may be constructed; 
viz., the official N. Y. Stock Exchange 
list, published by F. E. Fitch, 47 Broad 
St., N. Y.. the N. Y. Evening Sun, and 
the Wall Street Journal. For general ac- 
curacy, reliability and economy, we prefer 
the Evening Sun, which costs, postpaid, 
only 20 cents a month, or $2 a year. 

—in- 



Detecting 
Accumulation 
and Dis- 
tribution 



Tape Reading 



¥99ll« 



^§ 

*0^^ Aft 

RR u 



919 

919 



89 



6 



99t^9 2 

s«995j99 ?g 

S9 ^ 

R99«*9999^^9g ^ 



«9; 



9« 



.f9! 
9^99^99 



The Use of Charts as Guides and Indicators 

We produce a Figure Chart of Amal- 
gamated Copper showing movements 
during the 1903 panic and up to the fol- 
lowing March (1904). It makes an in- 
teresting study. The stock sold early 
in the year at 75^ and the low point 
reached during the above period was 
33^. The movements prior to those 
recorded here show a series of down- 
ward steps, but when 36 is reached, the 
formation changes, and the supporting 
points are raised. A seven-point rally, a 
reaction to almost the low figure, and 
another sixteen-point rally follow. 

On this rally the lines 48-49 gradually 
form the axis and long rows of these 
figures seem to indicate that plenty of 
stock is for sale at this level. In case 
we are not sure as to whether this is 
further accumulation or distribution we 
wait until the price shows signs of break- 
ing out of this narrow range. After the 
second run up to 61 the gradually lower- 
ing tops warn us that pressure is resum- 
ed. We therefore look for lower prices. 

The downward steps continue till 35 Interpreting 
is touched, where a 36-7 line begins to ^« Chart 
form. There is a dip to 335^, which 
gives us the full figure 34, after which 
the bottoms are higher and lines com- 
mence forming at 38-9. Here are all 
the earmarks of manipulative depression 
and accumulation — the stock is not al- 
lowed to rally over 39 until liquidation 
is complete. Then the gradually raised 
bottoms notify us in advance that the 



Tape Reading 

stock is about to push through to higher 
levels. 

If the Figure Chart were an infallible 
guide no one would have to learn any* 
thing more than its correct interpretation 
in order to make big money. Our corre- 
spondent says, ''after a thorough trial of 
the chart on U. P. I find that I could have 
made a very considerable sum if I had 
followed the indications shown." But 
he would not have followed the indica- 
tions shown. He is fooling himself. It 
is easy to look over the chart afterwards 
and see where he could have made correct 
plays, but I venture to say he never 
tested the plan under proper conditions. 

Let anyone who thinks he can make 
money following a Figure Chart or any 
other kind of a chart have a friend pre- 
pare it, keeping secret the name of the 
stock and the period covered. Then put 
down on paper a positive set of rules 
which are to be strictly adhered to, so 
that there can be no guesswork. Each 
situation will then call for a certain play 
and no deviation is to be allowed. Cover 
^^* ■ up with a sheet of paper all but the be- 

ginning of the chart, gradually sliding the 
paper to the right as you progress. Re- 
cord each order and execution just as if 
actually trading. Put RoUo Tape down 
as coppering every trade and when done 
send him a check for what you have lost. 

I have yet to meet the man who has 
made money trading on a Figure Chart 
'^ver an extended period. 



The Use of Charts m Guides and Indicators 

Any kind of a chart will show some 
profits at times, but the test is: How 
much money will it make during a year's 
operations? 

The Figure Chart can be used in other 
ways. Some people construct figure 
charts showing each fractional change in- 
stead of full points. The idea may also 
be used in connection with the Dow, 
Jones & Co. averages or N. Y, Times 
average prices. But for the practical 
Tape Reader the full figure chart first 
described is about the only one we- can 
recommend. 

Its value to the Tape Reader lies chief- 
ly in its warnings of important moves 
thus putting him on the watch for the 
moment when either process is complet- 
ed ,and the marking up or down begins. 

The chart gives the direction of com- 
ing moves ; the tape^isays "when." 

The ordinary single line chart which 
is so widely used, is valuable chiefly 
as a compact history of a stock's move- 
ments. If the stock which is charted 
were the only one in the market, its 
gyrations would be less erratic and its 
chart, therefore, a more reliable indi- 
cator of its trend and destination. But 
we must keep before us the incontro- 
vertible fact that the movements of every 
stock are to a greater or lesser extent Reciprocal 
affected by those of everjr other stock. Influeticet 



Tape Reading 

This in a large measure accounts for the 
instability of stock movements as record- 
ed in single line charts. 

Then, too, as shown in foregoing stud- 
ies in this series, one stock may be the 
lever with which the whole market is 
being held up, or the club with which the 
general list is being pounded. A chart 
of the pivotal stock might give a strong 
buying indication, whereupon the blind 
chart devotee would go long to his ulti- 
mate regret ; for when the concealed dis- 
tribution was completed his stock would 
probably break quickly and badly. 

This shows clearly the advantage ol 
Tape Reading over chart playing. The 
Tape Reader sees ever)rthing that is go- 
ing on: chart player's vision is limited. 
Both aim to get in right and go with the 
trend, but the eye that comprehends tfie 
market as a whole is the one which can 
read this trend most accurately. 

If one wishes a mechanical trend indi- 
cator as a supplement and a guide to his 
Tape ReadinjGT, he had best keep a chart 
composed of the average daily hieh and 
low of ten leading stocks, say Union, 
A Compedt* Reading, St. Paul, N. Y. Central and 
Chart ErJe amone the railroads, and Anaconda, 

Smelters, U. S. Steel, Car Foundry and 
Westinghouse among the industrials. 
First find the average high and average 
low for the day and make a chart show- 



The Use of Charts as Guides and Indicators 

ing which was touched first. This will 
be found a more reliable guide than the 
Dow, Jones averages, which only consid- 
er the closing bid of each day, and which, 
as strongly illustrated in the May, 1901, 
panic, frequently do not fairly represent 
the day's actual fluctuations. 

Such a composite chart is of no value 
to the Tape Reader who scalps and closes 
out everything daily. But it should bene- 
fit those who read the tape for the pur- 
pose of catching the important five or ten 
point moves. Such a trader will make 
no commitments not in accordance with 
the trend, as shown by this chart. His 
reason is that even a well planned bull 
campaign in a stock will not usually be 
pushed to completion in the face of a 
down trend in the eeneral market. There- 
fore he waits until the trend conforms 
to his indication. 

It seems hardly necessary to say that 
an up trend in any chart is indicated by 
consecutive higher tops and bottoms, like 
stairs going up, and the reverse by re- 
peated steps toward a lower level. A 
series of tops or bottoms at "^ the same 
level shows resistance. A protracted zig- 
zag within a short radius accompanied by 
very small volume means lifelessnesis, but 
with normal or abnormally large volume, 
accumulation or distribution is more or 
less evidenced. 

Here is a style of chart especially 
adapted to the study of volumes. The 



The VolttflM 
Chmrt 



Tape Reading 

{ollowing rough sketch will give an idea 
of it: 




Dividends 



VolvaM Fi^rc Cbart 

When made to cover a day's move- 
ments in a stock, this chart is particu- 
larly valuable in showing the quantity 
of stock at various levels. Figures repre- 
sent the total 100 share lots at the respec- 
tive fractions. Comparisons are readily 
made by adding the quantities horizon- 
tally. Many other suggestions may be de- 
rived from the study of this chart. 

An important point in connection with 
the making of charts is the treatment 
of a stock which sells ex-dividend. Many 
people consider a dividend as equal to a 
corresponding decline in market price; 
in fact, a prominent publisher of charts 
follows this method. We do not agree. 
In our opinion when a stock sells ex- 
dividend the scale should be changed so 
that the stock will show the same relative 
position as before the dividend. For in- 

— 12i- 



tt — - Itt M dtt tfV iiAaMitflt 




Tape Rmm 

Our correspondent in saying ''a chart 
is but a copy of the tape'' doubtless refers 
to the chart of one stock* The full tape 
cannot possibly be charted. The tape 
does tell the story, but charting one or 
two stocks is like recording the actions 
of one individual as exemplifying the ac- 
tions of a very large family. 



I2« 



IX. Daily Trades vb. luong Pull 

QpersiUonB 

JUST now I took a small triangu* 
lar piece of blotting paper 
three-eighths of an inch at its wid- 
est, and stuck it on the end of a 
pin. I then threw a blot of ink on a 
paper and put the blotter into contact. 
The ink fairly jumped up into the blot- 
ter, leaving the paper comparatively dry. 

This is exactly how the market acts Absorption 
on the tape when its absorptive po>\^ers 
are greater than the supply — ^large quan- 
tities are taken at the offered prices and 
at the higher levels. Prices leap for- 
ward. The demand seems insatiable. 

After two or three blots had thus been 
absorbed, the blotter would take no more. 
It was thoroughhr saturated. Its de- 
mands were satisned. Just in this way 
the market comes to a standstill at the 
top of a rise and hangs there. Supply 
and demand are equalized at the new 
price level. 

Then I filled my pen with ink, and let 
the fluid run off the point and onto ttie 

— 12T— 



Taptt Rcftding 

blotter. (This illustrated the distribution 
of stocks in the market.) Beyond a 
certain point the blotter would t^e no 
more. A drop formed and fell to the 
paper. (Supply exceeded demand.) The 
more I put on the blotter the faster fell 
the drops. (Liquidation — ^market seek- 
ing a lower level.) 

This is a simple way of fixing in our 
minds the principal opposing forces that 
are constantly operating in uie market — 
absorption and distribution, demand and 
supply, support and pressure. The more 
adept a Tape Reader becomes in weigh- 
ing and measuring these elements, the 
more successful he will be. 

But he must remember that even his 
most accurate readings will often be ntd- 
lified by events which are transpiring 
every moment of the day. His stock 
may start upward with a rush — appar- 
ently with power enough to carry it sev- 
eral points ; but after advancing a couple 
of points it may run up against a larger 
quantity of stock than can be absort^ 
or some unforeseen incident may change 
the whole complexion of the market. The 
Watchfulness jap^ Reader must be quick to detect such 

changes, switch his position and go with 
this newly formed trend. 

To show how an operator may be 
caught twice on the wrong side in one day 
and still come out ahead, let us look at 
the tape of December 21, 1908. 

Union Pacific opened below the pre- 
vious night's close: 500 . 179 . 6000 . 



Dafly Trades vi. Long Pull Operadont 

178^ and for the first few moments 
look^ as though there was some inside 
support. Supposing the Tape Reader 
had 

BOUGHT 100 Union Pxcinc at 178^, 

he would have soon noticed fresh sell- 
ing orders in sufficient volume to pro- 
duce weakness. Upon this he would 
have immediately 

SOLD 200 Union Pacific at 178 J4» 

Eutting him short one hundred at the 
itter price. The weakness increased 
and after a drive to 176}^, two or three 
warnings were given that the pressure 
was temporarily off. A comparatively 
strong undertone developed in Southern ^ Mistake 
Pacific as well as other stocks and short 
covering began in Union Pacific, which 
came 600 . 176^ . 1000 . ^, then 177;^. 
Assuming that the operator consider^ 
this the turn, he would have 
BOUGHT 200 Union PAanc at 176^, 
which was the next quotation. This would 
have put him long. Thereafter the mar- 
ket showed more resiliency, but only small 
lots appeared on the tape. 

A httle later the market quiets down. 
The rally does not hold wdl. He ex- 
pects the stock to react a^in to the low 
point. This it does, but it fails to halt 
there; it goes driving through to 176, 
accompanied by considerable weakness 
in the other active stocks. This is his 
indication that fresh liquidation has start- 
ed. So he 



Tape Reading 

SELLS 200 Union Pacific at 176. 

That is, he dumps over his long stock and 
goes short at 176. 

The weakness continues and there is 
no sign of a rally until after the stock 
has struck 174}4. This being a break of 
6J4 points since yesterday, the Tape 
Reader is now wide awake for signs of a 
turn, realizing that every additional frac- 
tion brings him nearer to that point, 
wherever it may be. 

After touching 174J4 the trend of the 
market changes completely. Larger lots 
are in demand at the offered prices. There 
is a final drive but very little stock comes 
out on it. During this drive he 

^. BUYS 100 Union Pacific at 174^, 

the Turn and as signs of a rally multiply he 

BUYS 100 Union Pacific at 17654. 

From that moment it is easy sailing. 
There is ample opportunity for him to 
unload his last purchase just before the 
close when he 

Sells 100 Union Pacific at 176 J<. 

Boiiffht Bold. Low Profit. 

179% 178H ie2.00 

17«% 17W It87.00 

176% 176 87.60 

174% 176 112J0 

VmZ 176% 167.60 

Commltsloiii and taxos.... 188.00 

1886.00 $887.00 



Not proOt for tho dtij $102.00 



Daily Trades ▼•• Long Pull Operations 

This is doing very well considering he 
was caught twice on the wrong side and 
in his wigglings paid $135 in commissions 
and taxes. 

Success in trading being chiefly a ques- 
tion of reducing and eliminating losses, 
commissions, interest and revenue 
stamps, let us see whether he might have 
used better judgment. His first trade 
seems to have been made on what ap- 
peared to be inside buying. No trend had 
developed. He saw round lots being 
taken at 178^ and over and reasoned 
that a rally should naturally follow pro- 
notmced support. His mistake was in not 
waiting for a clearly defined trend. If Waiting for 
the buying was strong enough to absorb *^® Trend 
all of^rings and turn the market, he 
would have done better to have waited 
till this was certain. When a stock holds 
steady within a half point radius it does 
not signify a reversal of trend, but rather 
a halting place from which a new move 
in either direction may begin. 

Had he followed the first sharp move, 
his original trade would have been on the 
short — ^not the long side. This would 
have saved him his first loss with its 
attendant expenses, aggregating $89.50, 
and would have nearly doubled the day's 
profits. 

His second loss was made on a trade 
which involved one of the finest points 
in the art of Tape Reading, viz., that 
of distinguishing a rally from a change 
in trend. A gMd way to do this sue- 



Taptt Reading 

cessfuUy is to figure where a stock is 
due to come after it makes an upturn, 
allowing that a normal rally is from one- 
half to two-thirds of the decline. That 
is, when a stock declines two and a half 
points we can look for at least a point 
and a quarter rally unless the pressure is 
still on. In case the decline is not over, 
the rally will fall short. 

Distingaishing What did Union do after it touched 
a Mere RaUy 176>^ ? It sold at 176^ . fi . 177}4. 

Having declined from 179}4 to 176>4, 
2^ points, it was due to rally at least 
l}i points, or to 177^. Its failing to 
make this figure indicated that the decline 
was not over and that his short position 
should be maintained. 

Furthermore, that last jump of half 
a point between sales showed an un- 
healthy condition of the market. For a 
few moments there was evidently a ces- 
sation of selling, then somebody reached 
for a hundred shares offered at 177>4. 
As the next sale was 176^ the hoUow- 
ness of the rise became apparent. 

While this rally lasted, the lots were 
small. This of itself was reason for 
not covering. Had a genuine demand 
sprung from either longs or shorts a 
steady rise, on increasing volumes, would 
have taken place. The absence of such 
indications seems to us now a reason 
for not covering and going long at 17^. 

It is very difficult for anyone to s^y 
what he would actually have done un- 
der the circumstances, but had both these 



Dafly Tr«det ▼•• Long Pall OperatiotM 

trades been avoided for the reasons men- 
tion^, the profit for the day would have 
been $421, as the 100 sold at 178;^ would 
have been covered at 174^, and the long Studying 
at 176 J4 sold out at 176^^. So we can see 
the advantage of studying our losses and 
mistakes, with a view to benefiting in fu- 
ture transactions. 

As previously explained, the number 
of dollars profit is subordinate to whether 
the trader can make profits at all and 
whether the points made exceed the 
points lost. With success from this 
standpoint it is only a question of increas- 
ed capital enabling one to enlarge his 
trading unit. 

A good way to watch the progress of 
an account is to keep a book showing 
dates, quantities, prices, profits and loss- 
es, also conunission, tax and interest 
charges. Beside each trade should be en- 
tered the number of points net profit or 
loss, together with a running total show- 
ing just how many points the account is 
ahead or behind. A chart of these latter 
figures will prevent anyone fooling him- 
self as to his progress. People are too 
apt to remember their profits and forget 
their losses. 

The losses taken by an expert Tape 
Reader are so small that he can trade in 
much larger units than one who is away 
from the tape or who is trading with an 
arbitrary stop. The Tape Reader will 
seldom take over half a point to a point 
loss for the reason that he will generally 

— 18S— 



Small Loties 



Di£Ference in 
Individuals 



Tape Reading 

buy or sell at, or close to, the pivotal 
point or the line of resistance. There- 
fore, should the trend of his stock sud- 
denly reverse, he is with it in a moment. 
The losses in the above mentioned Union 
Pacific transactions (^ and ^ respec- 
tively) are perhaps a fair average, but 
frequently he will be able to trade with a 
risk of only }i, }i or yi. 

The fact that this possible loss is con- 
fined to a fraction should not lead him 
to trade too frequently. It is better to 
look on part of the time; to rest the 
mind and allow the judgment to clarify. 
Dull days will often constrain one for a 
time and are therefore beneficial. 

The big money in Tape Reading is 
made during very active markets. Big 
swings and large volumes produce un- 
mistakable indications and a harvest for 
the experienced operator. He welcomes 
twenty, thirty and fifty-point moves in 
stocks like Reading, Union or Consoli- 
dated Gas — ^powerful plays by financial 
giants. 

And this fact reminds us of one of the 
things we have heretofore intended to 
reason out: Is it better to close trades 
each day, or hold through reactions, and 
if necessary, for several days or week.« 
in order to secure a large profit? 

The answer to this question depends 
somewhat upon the temperament of the 
Tape Reader. If his make-up be such 
that he can closely follow the smal^ 
swings with profit, gradually becoming 



Daily Trades vs. Long Pull Operations 

more expert and steadily increasing his 
commitments, he will shortly "arrive" 
by that route. If his disposition is such 
that he cannot trade in and out actively, 
but is content to wait for big opportuni- 
ties and patient enough to hold on for 
large profits, he will also "get there." 
It is impossible to say which style of 
trading would produce the best average 
results, because it depends altogether 
upon individual qualifications. 

Looking at the question broadly, we 
should say that the Tape Reader who 
understood the lines thus far suggested 
in this series, might find it both difficult 
and less profitable to operate solely for 
the long swings. In the first place, he 
would be obliged to let twenty or thirty 
opportunities pass by to every one that 
he would accept. The small swings of 
one to three points greatly outnumber 
the five and ten-point movements, and 
there would be a considerable percentage 
of losing trades no matter how be oper- 
ated. 

Many of the indications, such as the 
extent of reactions, lines of resistance, q, *. 
etc., will be found equally operative in rtJ?Lon» ' 
the broader swings, just as an enlarge- Swings 
ment of a photograph retains the lines 
of its original. 

Tape Reading seems essentially a pro- 
fession for the man who is mentally ac- 
tive and 'flexible, capable of making quick 
and accurate decisions and keenly sensi- 
tive to the most minute indications. On 



Taptt Reading 

the other hand, trading for the larger 
swings requires one to ignore the minor 
indications and to put some stress upon 
the influential news of the day, and its 
effect upon sentiment; he must stand 
ready to take larger losses and in many 
ways handle himself in a manner alto- 
gether different from that of the small 
swing trader. 

The more closely we look at the prop- 
osition, the more the two methods of 
operating seem to disunite, the broad 
swing plan appearing best adapted to 
those who are not in continuous touch 
with the ticker and who therefore have 
the advantage of distance and perspec- 
tive. 

There is no reason why the Tape 
AuxiliArv Reader should not make long swine 

Xa^»^ trading an auxiliary profit producer it 

he can keep such trades from influenc- 
ing his daily operations. 

For example, in the previously men- 
tioned shake-down in Reading from 
144^ to 118, on his first bu}ring indica- 
tion he could have taken on an extra 
lot for the long swing, knowing that if 
the turn had really been made, a rally to 
over 130 was due. A stop order would 
have limited his risk and conserved his 
profits as they rolled up and there is no 
telling how much of the subsequent forty 
point rise he might have secured. 

Another case was when Steel broke 
from 58 J4 (November, 1908) to 4:1% in 
February. The market at the time was 

— is«- 



Daily TradM vs. Long Pull OpermtioBs 

hinging on Steel and it was likely that 
the Tape Reader would be operating in 
it. His first long trade under this plan 
would be for at least a hundred shares 
more than his usual amount, with a stop 
on the long pull lot at sav 40^. He 
would naturally expect a raUy ot at least 
^H points (to 60), but would, in a sense, 
forget this hundred shares, so long as 
the market showed no signs of another 
important decline. When it reached 60 
he might still be holding it. 

The above are merely a couple of op- 
portunities. Dozens of such show them- 
selves every year and should form no 
small part of the Tape Reader's income. 
But he must separate such trades from 
his regular daily trading; to allow them 
to conflict would destroy the effective- 
ness of both. If he finds the long pull 
trade interfering with the accuracy of 
his judgment, he should close it out at 
once. He must play on one side of the 
fence if he cannot operate on both. 

One can readily foresee how a trader 
with one hundred shares of Steel at 43 
for the long pull, and two hundred for 
the day, would be tempted to close out 
aU three hundred on indications of a de^ 
dine. This is where he can test his abiU ^ ^^ 
ity to act in a dual capacity. He must capacity 
ask himself: Have I good reason for 
thinking Steel will sell down five points 
before up five? Is this a small reaction 
or a bi^ shake-down? Are we still in a 
bull swmg? Has the stock had its nor- 

— 1ST— 



Tape Reading 

mal rally from the last decline? These 
and many other questions will enable him 
to decide whether he should hold this 
hundred shares or "clean house." 

It takes an exceptionally strong will 
and clear head to act in»this way without 
interfering with one's regular trading. 
Anyone can sell two hundred and hold 
one hundred; but will his judgment be 
biased because he is simultaneously long 
and short — ^bullish and bearish ? There's 
the rub ! 

AdvanUffe of ^^^ ^^ Tape Reader is apt to pre- 

a Clean fer a clean slate at 3 p. m. every day, 

Slate so that he can sit down to his ticker 

at the next morning's opening and say, 
*1 have no commitments and no opinion. 
I will follow the first strong indication." 
He would rather average $100 a day for 
ten days than make $1,000 on one trade 
in the same length of time. The risk is 
generally limited to a fraction and hav- 
ing arrived at a point where he is show- 
ing even small average daily profits, his 
required capital per 100 shares need not 
be over $1,500 to $2,000. 

Suppose for sixty days on 100-share 
operations his average profits over losses 
were only a quarter of a point — ^$25 a 
day. At the end of that time his capital 
would have been increased by $1,500, 
enabling him to trade in 200 share lots. 
Another thirty days with similar results 
and he could trade in 300-share lots, and 
so on. I do not mention these figures for 
any other purpose than to again empha- 

—188- 



Daily TQules vs. Lon|r puU Operationi 

size that the objective point in Tape 
Reading is not large individual profits, 
but a continuous chipping in of small av- 
erage not profits per day. 

About two months ago, I am told, a 
man from the West came into the office 
of The Magazine of Wall Street, and 
said that he had been impressed by this 
series on Tape Reading, and had come to 
New York for the sole purpose of trying An Incident 
his hand at it. He had $1,000 which he 
was willing to lose in demonstrating 
whether he was fitted for the work. 

He was advised not to trade in over 
ten-share lots, and was especially warned 
against operating at all until after he 
had actually studied the tape for two or 
three months. 

Recently, I am informed, he called 
again and related some of his experiences. 
It seems that he could not abstain from 
trading, but started within two or three 
days aitter he decided on a brokerage 
house. He stated that during the two 
months he had made forty-two trades of 
ten shares each and had never had on 
hand over twenty full shares at any one 
time. He admitted that he had frequent- 
ly mixed guesswork and tips with his 
Tape Reading but as a rule he had fol- 
lowed the tape. 

His losses were seldom over a point 
and his greatest loss was one and a half 
points. His maximum profit was three 
points. He had at times traded in other 
stocks beside the leaders. In spite of his 



Tape RMdiagr 

inexperience, and his attempt to mix tips 
and guess with shrewd judgment, he was 
ahead of the game, after paying commis- 
sions, etc. 

This was especially surprising in view 
of the trader's market through which he 
had passed. While the amount of his 
net profit was small, the fact that he had 
shown any profit during this study period 
was reason enough for congratulation. 

Another handicap whidi he did not 
perhaps realize was his environment. He 
had tneen trading in an ofHce where he 
could hear and see what everyone else 
was doing, and where news, gossip and 
opinions were freely and openly expres- 
sed by many people. All these things 
tended to influence him, and to switch 
him from his Tape Reading. 
(«iKiliig I have no doubt that having mastered 

the art of cutting losses and keeping com- 
mitments down, he will soon overcome 
his other deficiencies. Given a broad, 
active market, he should show increasing 
average daily profits. 

Speculation is a business. It must be 
learned. 



X. Varionf Examplcf ami Sotftfeatioiii 



RECENT trading observations and 
experiments have convinced me 
that it is impracticable and ahnost 
impossible to gauge the extent 
of a movement by its initial fluctuations. 

Many important swings begin in the QaugiBg the 
most modest way. The top of an im- Swing 
portant decline may present nothing more 
than a light volume and a drifting ten- 
dency toward lower prices, subsequently 
developing into a heavy, slumpy market, 
and ending in a violent downward plunge. 

In a previous number I suggested that 
the Tape Reader select only diose moves 
which seem to offer opportunities for 
wide swings. My opinion now is that 
the operator should aim to catch every 
important swing in the leading active 
stock. To do tms he must act promptly 
when a stock goes into a new field or oUi* 
erwise gives an indication, and he must 
be ready to follow wherever it leads. If 
it has been moving within a three-point 
radius and suddenly takes on new life 



Tape Reading 

and activity, bursting through its former 
bounds, he must go with it. 

1 do not mean that he should try to 
catch every wriggle. If the stock rises 
three points and then reverses one or 
one and a half points on light volume, 
he must look upon it as a perfectly nat- 
ural reaction and not a change of trend. 
The expert operator will not ordinarily 
let all of three points get away from him. 
He will keep pushing his stop up behind 
until the first good reaction puts him out 
at close to the high figure. This leaves 
him in a position to repurchase on the re- 
action, provided no better opportunity 
presents itself. Having purchased at 
such a time, he will sell out again as the 
price once more approaches the high fig- 
ure, unless indications point to its forg- 
ing through to a new high level. 

Every movement of the market and of 
Suiieet^^ each stock passes through stages corre- 

Movements sponding to those in the life of an indi- 

vidual, aptly described by my old college 
chum, Bill Shakespeare, as "The Seven 
Ages." The Tape Reader aims to get in 
during Infancy and out at Old Age. 

Usually a movement gives signs when 
it begins to totter. An example was giv- 
en in the rise in Union Pacific about June 
21st to 23d (1909), when the stock rose 
from 187J^ to 194|^, accompanied by an 
abnormal advance in the preferred. Each 
morning the London price for both issues 
came higher and there was persistent 
buying all day in the New York market. 



Various Bzamples and Sugi^estions 

After touching 194^^ the movement com- 
pletely fizzled out. Buying demand 
ceased. The preferred reacted sharply, 
and the common came back to 193 Jt • 
Therenftcr its rallies were feeble, the 
pressure wa3 all on the down side, and 
on June 26th, it was still heavy at 191%. 

A new bull movement may have its 
birth during great weakness or pressure. 
Just prior to the above time, Reading 
was pounded down to 147^^, then to 
147 J4» and the resistance which it offered 
at this level gave notice that a new swing 
was about to be inaugurated. These were 
signs that the Tape Reader had better 
get bullish. Purchases could have been 
made with only a fractional risk, and sub- 
sequent profits were chiefly on the bull 
side. Two or three days later the price 
touched 166J4, then it went above 158. 

The more we study volumes, the better Importance of 
we appreciate their value in Tape Read- Volumes 
ing. It frequently occurs that a stock 
will work within a three-point range for 
days at a time without giving one a 
chance for a respectable-sized "scalp." 
Without going out of these boundaries, it 
suddenly begins coming out on the tape 
in thousands instead of hundreds. This 
is evidence that a new movement has 
started, but not necessarily in the direc- 
tion which is first indicated. The Tape 
Reader must immediately go with the 
trend, but until it is clearly defined and 
the stock breaks its former limits with 
large and increasing volumes, he must 

—148— 



Tape ReadittK 

exercise great caution. The reason is 
this : If tiie stock has been suddenly ad- 
vanced, it may be for the purpose of fa- 
cilitating sales by a large operator. 

The best way to distinguish the genu- 
ine from the fictitious move is to watch 
out for abnormally large volumes within 
a small radius. This is usually evidence 
of manipulation. The large volume is 
simply a means of attracting buyers and 
disguising the hand of the operator. 

A play of this kind took place when 
Reading struck 159f^ on June, 1909. I 
counted some 80,000 shares witiiin about 
half a point of 159 — ^unmistakable notice 
of a coming decline. This was a case 
where the stock was put up before being 
put down, and the Tape Reader who in- 
terpreted the move correctly and played 
for a good down swing would have made 
considerable money. 

We frequentiy hear people complain- 
ing that ''the public is not in this mar- 
ket," as though that were a reason why 
stocks should not go up or the market 
The Public should be avoided. The speaker is usu- 

ally one of those who constitute ''the pub- 
lic," but he regards' the expression as 
signifying "every outsider except my- 
self." In the judgment of many the mar- 
ket is better off without the public. To 
be sure, brokers do not enjoy so large 
a business, the fluctuations are not so 
riotous, but the market moves in an 
orderly way and responds more accu- 
rately to prevailing conditions. 



Various Bjuunplet and Sui^i^ettions 

A market in which the public pre- 
dominates represents a sort of specula- 
tive "jag" indulged in by those whose 
stock market knowledge should be rated 
at }i. Everyone recognizes the fact that 
when the smoke clears away, the Street is 
full of victims who didn't know how and 
couldn't wait to learn. Their pluiigings 
produce violent fluctuations, however, 
and in lliis respect are of advantage to the 
Tape Reader who would much rather see 
ten-point than three-point swings. 

To offset this, there are some disad- 
vantages. First, in a market where there 
is "rioting of accumulated margins," the 
tape is so far behind that it is seldom 
one can secure an execution at anywhere Executioii of 
near his price. This is especially true Orderp 
when activity breaks out in a stock which 
has been comparatively dull. So many 
people with money, watching the tape, are 
attracted by these apparent opportunities, 
that the scramble to get in results in every 
one paying more timn he figured; thus 
the Tape Reader finds it impossible to 
know where he is at until he gets his 
report. His tape prices are five minutes 
stale and his broker is so busy it takes 
four or five minutes for an execution in- 
stead of one or two minutes. 

In the next place, stop orders are often 
filled at from small fractions to points — 

away from his stop price — ^there is no 
telling what figure he will get, while in 
ordinary markets he can place his stops 
within ^ of a resistance point and f re- 



Tape Reading 

quently have the price come within 5^ 
of his stop without catching it. 

So it is a question whether, all things 
considered, the presence of the public is 
a help or a detriment to successful Tape 
Reading. 

Speaking of stop orders : The ways in 

Q which one may manipulate his stops for 

Stop ordert protection and advantage, become more 

numerous as experience is acquired. If 
the Tape Reader is operating for a frac- 
tional average profit per trade, or per 
day, he cannot afford to let a point profit 
run into a loss, or fail to "plug" a larger 
profit at a point where at least a portion 
of it will be preserved. 

One of my recent day's trading will 
illustrate this idea. I had just closed 
out a couple of trades, in which there 
had been losses totaling slightly over 
a point. Both were on the long side. 
The market began to show signs of a 
break, and singling out Reading as the 
most vulnerable, I got short of it at 
150^. In a few moments it sold below 
] 50. My stop was moved down so there 
couldn't be a loss, and soon a slight rally 
and another break gave me a new stop 
which insured a profit. A third drive 
started, and I pushed the stop down to 
within % of the tape price at the time, 
as it was late in the day and I considered 
this the final plunge. By the time my 
order reached the floor the price was well 
away from this latest stop and when 
the selling became most violent I told my 



—146— 



Various ExamplM and Suggeationa 

broker to cover "at the market." The 
price paid was within % of the bottom 
for the day, and netted 2^ after commis- 
sions were paid. 

I strongly advocate this method of sumiiiatioii 
profit insuring. The scientific elimina- of LoMet 
tion of loss is one of the most important 
factors in the art, and the operator who 
fails to properly protect his paper profits 
will find that many a point which he 
thought he had cinched has slipped away 
from him. 

It is also a question whether, in such a 
case, the trade had better not be stopped 
out than closed out. When you push a 
stop close behind a rise or a decline, you 
leave the way open for a further profit ; 
but when you close the trade of your own 
volition, you shut oti all such chances. 
If it is your habit to close out everything 
before three o'clock daily, the stop may 
be placed closer than ordinarily during 
the last fifteen minutes of the session, 
and when a sharp move in the desired di- 
rection occurs, the closing out may be 
done by a stop only a fraction away from 
the extreme price. This plan of using 
stops is a sort of squeezing out the last 
drop of profit from each trade and never 
losing any part that can possibly be re- 
tained. 

Suppose the operator sells a stock short 
at 53 and it breaks to 51. He is foolish 
not to bring his stop down to 51 % unless 
the market is ripe for a heavy decline. 
With his stop at this point he has two 



Tape Reading 

chances out of three that the result will 
be satisfactory: (1) The price may eo 
lower and yield a further profit; (2) The 
normal rally to 52 will catch his stop and 
enable him to .put the stock out again at 
that price; (3) The stock will rally to 
about 61%, catch his stop and then go 
lower. But he can scarcely mourn over 
the loss of a further profit. 

If the stock refuses to rally the full 
point to which it is entitled, that is, if 
it comes up to Biyi or ^ and still acts 
heavy, it may be expected to break lower, 
and there usually is ample time to get 
short again at a price that will at least 
cover commissions. 

There is nothing more confusing than 
to attempt scalping on both sides of the 
market at once. You may go long of a 
stock which is being put up or is going 
up for some special reason, and short of 
another stock which is persistently weak. 
Both trades may pan out successfully, 
Scalping on ^^* meantime the judgment will be inter- 
Both sides f ered with and some foolish mistake will 

be made in four cases out of five. As 
Dickson G. Watts said, "Act so as to 
keep the mind clear, the judgment trust- 
worthy." The mind is not clear when 
the trader is working actively on two op- 
posing sides of the market. A bearish 
indication is favorable to one trade, and 
unfavorable to the other. He finds him- 
self interpreting every development as 
being to his advantage and forgetting the 
important fact that he is also on the op- 
posite side. 



Bxamplet and Suggcstionf 

If you are short of one stock and see 
another that looks like a purchase, it is 
much better to wait until you have cov- 
ered your short trade (on a dip if pos- 
sible), and then take the long side of the 
other issue. The best time for both cov- 
ering and going long is on a recession 
which in such a case serves a double pur- 
pose. The mind should be made up in 
advance as to which deal offers the best 
chance for profit, so that when the mo- 
ment for action arrives there will be 
nothing to do but act. 

This is one great advantage the Tape 
Reader has over other operators who do 
not employ market science. B^ a process 
of elimination he decides which side of 
the market and which stock affords the 
best opportunity. He either gets in at 
the inception of a movement or waits for Getting In 
first reaction after the move has started. 
He knows just about where his stock 
should come on the reaction and judges 
by the yiray it then acts whether his first 
impression is confirmed or contradicted. 
After he gets in it must come up to ex- 
pectations or he should abandon the trade. 
If it is a bull move, the volume must in- 
crease and the rest of the market offer 
some support or at least not oppose it. 
The reactions must show a smaller vol- 
ume than the advances, indicating light 
pressure, and each upward swing must 
be of longer duration and reach a new 
high level, or it will mean that the rise 
has spent its force either temporarily or 
finally. 



Tape Readinir 

Tape Reading is the only known meth- 
od of trading which gets you in at the 
Advanugei of banning, keeps you posted throughout 
Tape Rea^K the move, and gets you out when it has 

cuhninated. 

Has anyone ever heard of a man, meth- 
od, system, or anything else that will do 
this tor you in Wall Street? 

It has made fortunes for the compara- 
tively few who have followed it. 

It is an art in which one can become 
highly expert and more and more success- 
ful as experience sandpapers his work 
and shows him what to avoid. 



IflO- 



XI. Obataelcfl to be Overcome — 
PoasiUe Proliti 

MENTAL poise is an indispensable 
factor in Tape Reading. The 
mind should be absolutely free 
to concentrate upon the work; 
there should be no feeling that certain 
things are to be accomplished within a 
given time ; no fear, anxiety, or greed. 

When a Tape Reader has his emotions 
well in hand, he will play as though the 
game were dominoes. When anything in- 
terferes with this attitude it should be 
eliminated. If, for example, there be an 
unusual series of losses, the trader had 
better suspend operations until he dis- 
covers the cause. 

Following are some of the obstacles 
which are likely to be encountered : 

1. One may be trading too often. 
Many opportunities for profit develop 
from each day's movements; only the 
very choicest should be acted upon. There 
should be no haste. The market will be 
there to-morrow in case to-day's oppor- 
tunities do not meet requirements. 

—151— 



Sell Control 



Tape Readinf 

2. Anxiety to make a record, to avoid 
losses, to secure a certain profit for the 
day or period will greatly warp the judg* 
ment, and lead to a low percentage of 
profits. Tajpe Reading is a good deal like 
laying eggs. If the hen is not left to 
pick up the necessary food and retire in 
peace to her nest, she will not produce 
properly. If she is worried by dogs and 
small boys, or tries to lay seven ^gs out 
of material for six, the net proceeds may 
be an omelet. 

The Tape Reader's profits should de- 
velop naturally. He should buy or sell 
because it is the thing to do — ^not be- 
cause he wants to make a profit or fears 
to make a loss. 

3. The market may be tmsuited to 
Tape Reading operations. When prices 
drift up and down without trend, like a 
ship without a rudder, and few positive 
indications develop, the percentage of 
losing trades is apt to be high. When 
this condition continues it is well to hold 
off until the character of the market 
changes. 

Brokerage 4. One's broker may be giving poor 

service. In a game as fine as this, every 
fraction counts. Executions of market 
orders should average not over two min- 
utes. Stop orders should be reported in 
less time as such orders are on the floor 
and at the proper post when they become 
operative. By close attention to details 
in the handling of my orders, I have 
been able to reduce the average time of 



Obstacles to be Overcome 

mv executions to less than one minute. 
The quickest report obtained thus far 
required but twenty-five seconds. To the 
best of my knowledge this is a record 
for New York Stock Exchange execu- 
tions of orders given from an office. 

A considerable portion of my orders 
are executed in from thirty to forty sec- 
onds, varying according to whether my 
broker is near the 'phone or in a distant 
crowd when the orders reach the floor 
and how far the identical "crowd" is 
from his 'phone. 

I have arranged a special order slip 
which distinguishes my orders from oth- 
ers. It reads : 



Df TV AT THE OFFERED 
DU I PRICE AND 
REPORT INSTANTLY 



Special 
Order Slip 



Tape Reading 

The selling slips read, "Sell at the bid 
price and report instantly." Such orders 
leave nothing to the discretion of the 
broker. He cannot "try to do better" 
than the momentary bid or offered price. 
Like Paddy at the wake, his business is 
to "hit the first head that opens its 
mouth." 

Ordinarily it is expected and is really 
Dkcrtttoi ^" advantage to the g:eneral run of specu- 

lators to have the broker use some dis- 
cretion ; that is, try to do better, provid- 
ing there is no chance of losing his ma 
ket. But I do not wish my broker to act 
thus for me. My indications usually 
show me the exact moment when a stock 
should be bought or sold under this meth- 
od, and a few moments' delay often 
means a good many dollars lost. 

With the execution of orders reduced 
to a matter of seconds, I can also hold 
stop orders in my own hands and when 
the stop price is reached, 'phone the order 
to buy or sell at the market. Results 
are very satisfactory as my own broker 
handles the orders and not the specialist 
or some other floor broker. 

To return to the question of mental 
equilibrium: The Tape Reader should 
be careful to trade only in such amounts 
as will not interfere with his judgment. 
If he finds that a series of losses upsets 
him it is an easy matter to reduce the 
number of shares to one-half or one- 
quarter of the regular amount, or even 
to ten shares, so that the dollars involved 

—154- 



Obstacles to be Overcome 

are no longer a factor. This gives him a 
chance for a little self-examination. 

If a person is in poor physical condi* 
tion or his mental alertness below par 
for any reason, he may be unable to stand 
the excitement attending the work. Dis- 
sipation, for example, may render one 
unfit to carry all the quotations in his 
head, or to plan and execute his moves 
quickly and accurately. When an3rthing 
of this kind occurs which prevents the 
free play of all the faculties it is best to 
bring the day's work to a close. 

Some of my readers may think it futile Fractional 
to aim for a fractional average profit per Profits 
trade when there are many full points per 
day to be made by holding on through 
days and weeks and getting full benefit of 
the big moves. Admitting that it is pos- 
sible to make many more points at times 
there is a risk of losses corresponding to 
the profits and the question is not how 
much we can fnake, but how much we 
can make net. 

Tape Reading reduces profit-making to 
a -manufacturing basis. 

To show how the nimble eighths pile 
up when their cumulative power is fully 
employed, I have prepared a table repre- 
senting the results of 250 trading days, 
starting with a capital of $1,000. It is 
assumed that the Tape Reader has reach- 
ed that stage of expertness where he can 
average one trade a day and a profit of 
$12.50 per trade, and that as fast as 
$1,000 is accumulated he adds 100 shares 
to his trading unit. 




It tiutt 

in Ae 

delays fig- 

[lyear or 

~ having 

ler can, 



Obstadts to be OvercooM 

without increasing his unit to over 1200 
shares, make $900 a week or $46,800 a 
year. 

One trader who for years has been 
trying to scalp the market and who could Overcomlac 
never jjuite overcome the "kitty," reports the **Kitty' 
this his first attempts at applying these 
rules resulted in a loss of about $20 per 
trade. This he gradually reduced to $12, 
then to $8, finally succeeding in throw- 
ing the balance over to the credit side and 
is now able to make a daily profit of from 
$12 to $.30 per 100 shares. This is doing 
very well indeed. I have no doubt that 
his profits will continue to increase. 

Some people seem to hold the opinion 
that as the profits desired are only ^ 
average per trade one should limit him* 
self in taking profits. Perhaps I have not 
made myself clear in this respect. 

I buy and sell when I get my indica- 
tions. In going into a trade I do not 
know whether it will show a profit or a 
loss, or how much. I try to trade at a 
point where I can secure protection with 
a stop from j4 ^o H point away, so that 
my risk is limited to this fraction plus 
commission and tax. If the trade goes 
iii my favor I push the stop up as soon 
as possible, to a point where there can be 
no loss. 

I do not let profits run blindly but 
only so long as there appears no indica- 
tion on which to close. No matter where 
my stop order stands, I am always on 
the watch for danger signals. Sometimes 



Tape Rcftdinf 

Takittf Profits I get them way in advance of the time a 

trade should be closed ; in other instances 
my '"get out'* will flash onto the tape as 
suddenly and as clearly defined as a 
streak of lightning against a black sky. 

When the tape says "get out" I never 
stop to reckon how much profit or loss 
I have or whether I am ahead or behind 
on the day. I strive for an increasing 
average profit but I do not keep my eye 
so much on the fraction or points made oi 
lost, so much as on myself. 

I endeavor to perfect myself in clear- 
headedness, quickness of thought, accu- 
racy of judgment, promptness in planning 
and executing my trades, foresight, in- 
tuition, courage and initiative. Master 
f ul control of myself in these respects will 
produce a winning average — ^it is merdy 
a question of practice. 

To show how accurately the method 
works out in practice, I will describe one 
recent day's trading in which there were 
three transactions, involving six orders 
(three buying and three selling). The 
market did not go one-eighth against me 
in five orders out of the six. In the 
sixtfi, the stock went ^ above the selling 
price at which my order was given. De- 
tails follow: 

I had no open trades. Kansas City 
Southern, which had been intensdy doll, 
came on the tape 2600 at 46^. I gave 
a buying order and before it could readi 
the "post" the Tape said 46^ and 47. 
The stock rose steadily and after sdl- 



Obstacles to be Overcome 

ing at 48^ and coming back to 48^^ I 
gave the selling order. It did not touch 
48^ again. 

The next trade was in Reading. I Successful 
saw that it was being held in chedc in Trades 
spite of its great strength. The stock 
had opened at 158. After a certain bulge 
I saw the reaction coming. When it ar- 
rived, and the stock was selling at 157^, 
I gave the buying order, got mine at 
157^. It immediately rose to 158^. I 
noted selling indications and gave the or- 
der while the stock was at that price on 
the tape. It did not react sufficiently to 
warrant my picking it up again and later 
went to 169^, which w^s ^ above my 
selling indication. 

Southern Pacific suddenly loomed up 
as a winner and I bought it at 135. It 
promptly went to 135}4.^ The rest of the 
market began to look temporarily over- 
bulled, so I gave my order to sell when 
the stock was 135}^, which proved to be 
the highest for the day, making the fifth 
time out of six orders when my stock 
moved almost instantly in my favor. 

This illustration is given as an exam- 
ple of the high percentage of accuracy 
r^ssible under this method of trading, 
do not pretend to be able to accompli^ 
these results except occasionally, tnit I 
am constandy striving to do so in a 
large percentage of my trades. 

If one makes 2}i points one day and 
loses 2 points in the next two days, he is 
}i ahead for the three days, or an aver- 



Tape Reading 

age of }i per day. He may have losing 
and winning streaks, get discoura|^ed and 
lose his nerve at times, but if he is made 
of the right stuff he will in time over- 
come all obstacles and land at the desired 
goal. 



—i&^ 



XII. Clofing tke Tradea — Surges- 
tioii0 for Students 

THE student of Tape Reading, es- 
pecially he who puts his knowl- 
edge into actual practice, is con- 
stantly evolving new ideas and 
making discoveries which modify his 
former methods. From each new eleva- 
tion he enjoys a broader view ; what were 
obstacles disappear; his problems grad- 
ually simplify. 

We have previously defined Tape 
Reading as the art of determining the 
immediate trend of prices. If one can 
do this successfully in the majority of his 
trades, his profits should roll up. But 
scenting the trend and getting in right is 
only one-half of the business. Knowing tt^mtft in 
when to close a trade is just as important Closing 
if not the most important part of a com- 
plete transaction. 

At a certain point in my trading, I 
became aware that a large percentage 
of my losing trades resulted from fail- 
ure to close at the culmination of what 



Tape Reading 

I have termed the immediate trend. An 
example will make this clear : New York 
Central was on a certain day the strong- 
est stock in a bull market which showed 
a tendency to react. The pressure was 
on Reading and Steel. My indications 
were all bullish, so I couldn't consistent- 
ly sell either of the latter short. I was 
looking for an opportunity to buy. The 
market began to slide off, Reading and 
Steel being the principal clubs with which 
the pounding was done. I watched them 
closely and the moment I saw that the 
selling of these two stocks had ceased, 
gave my order to buy New York Central, 
getting it at 137>^. It never touched 
Siere again, and in ten minutes was 139 
bid for 5,000 shares. 

Here I should have sold, as my buying 
An Error indication was for that particular ad- 

vance. Especially should I have sold 
when I saw the rise culminate in a spec- 
tacular bid which looked like bait for 
outside buyers. Of course the stock 
might have gone higher. The main trend 
for the day was upward. But for the 
time being 139 was the high point. I 
knew the stock was due to react from this 
figure, and it did, but at the bottom of 
the normal reaction selling broke out 
in fresh quarters and the whole market 
came down heavily. The result was that 
my profit was only a fraction of what it 
ought to have been. 

This is the way the trade might have 
been made: I should have sold when 



Clodng Trader— Suggestions for Students 

139 was noisily bid, and when the reac- 
tion had run its course, picked it up again, 
provided indications were still bullish. If 
they were not I would have been in the 
position of looking to get short instead 
of waiting for a chance to get out of my 
long. 

Having reserved in the early part of Taking Quick 
this book the right to revise my views, Profits 
I will here record the claim that the best 
results in active Tape Reading lie in 
scenting the moves as they occur, getting 
in when they start and out when they cul- 
minate. This will in most cases cause 
failure to get all of the moves in the one 
most active stock for the day, but should 
result in many small profits, and I believe 
the final results will exceed those realized 
by sitting through reactions with any one 
stock. 

Objections to the latter method are ^, _, . 
many. One is, the change in leader- LSdSSii? 
ship which frequently occurs several 
times during the same session. It be- 
ing the purpose of the Tape Reader to 
keep in the leading stock, he must aim 
to shift from one issue to another as 
they come to the front. 

It is exasperating to see your stock lose 
its prominence and "turn dead'' on your 
hands, especially if it occurs at a point 
where part of the profit has disappeared 



Tape Reading 

And there is little comfort in a half-point 
profit when some other issue would have 
shown three times as much. Each day's 
session should be made to yield the high- 
est possible amount of revenue, just as 
though it were the last day on which 
trading could be done, and there seems 
no better way of obtaining these re- 
sults than by the method mentioned 
above. 
Keeping the l^he decks are thus kept clear for what- 

Decks Clear ever offers ; there is no dead wood about. 

There is a very wide difference in men- 
tal attitude between the man who feels 
compelled to get out of something and 
one who is long of money and looking 
for a chance to make a fresh trade. 

The start and finish of one of the 
small swings is best illustrated by a tri- 
angle, the narrow end representing the 
commencement, and the wide end the 
culmination. The width, an upward 
move would appear thus : 




Trades— Suggestions for Students 
and a downward move thus : 




These figures denote the widening 
character of a move as it progresses and 
are intended to show how volume, ac- 
tivit}*^ and number of transactions expand 
until, at the end, comparatively active 
conditions prevail. The principle works 
the same in the larger swings; witness 
the spectacular rise in Union Pacific 
within a few sessions marking the end of 
the August, 1909, boom. 

After closing out a trade the tape will Looking 
tell on the following reaction whether Ahead 
you are justified in tslcing the same stock 
on again or whether some other issue 
will i>ay better. Frequently a stock will 
be seen preparing for a move two or 
three swings ahead of the one in which 
it becomes the leader. This is a fine 
point, but with study and practice the 
most complicated indications clarify. 

And now a word about the many wh*) 
are endeavoring to turn this series to 



Tape Reading 

practical account. The results which are 
attainable depend solely upon the indi- 
vidual. Each must work out his own 
method of trading, based on suggestions 
derived from these Studies or from other 
sources. It will doubtless be found that 
what is one man's meat is another'^ 
poison, and that no amount of "book lam- 
in' " will avail if the student does not put 
his knowledge to an actual test in the 
market. 

It is surprising how an acquaintance 
with subjects relative to the stock mar- 
ket, but seemingly having no bearing upon 
Tape Reading, will lead to opportunities 
or aid in making deductions. And so 
when asked what books will best supple* 
Necessity ment these Studies, I should say : Read 

for Study everything you can get hold of. If you 

find but a single idea in a publication it 
is well worth the time and money spent in 
procuring and studying it. 

Wall Street is crowded with men who 
are there in the hope of making money, 
but who cannot be persuaded to look at 
the proposition from a practical business 
standpoint. Least of all will they study 
it, for this means long hours of hard 
work, and Mr. Speculator is laziness per- 
sonified. Frequently I have met those 
who pin their faith to some one point, 
such as the volumes up or down, and call 
it Tape Reading. Others, unconsciously 
trading on mechanical indications, pre- 
tend to be reading the tape. Then there 
is a class of people who read the tape 



Closmg Trade«--Sagge9tion8 for Students 

with their tongues, calling off each trans- 
action, a certain accent on the higher or 
lower quotations indicating whether they 
are bullish or bearish. These and others 
in their class are merely operating on the 
superfiicial. If they would spend the 
same five or six hours a day (which they 
now practically waste) in close study of 
the business of speculation, the result in 
dollars would be more gratifying at the 
end of the year. As it is, the majority of 
them are now losing money. 

It is a source of satisfaction, however, 
that these Studies which, I believe, are 
the first practical articles ever written on 
the subject of Tape Reading, have stir- 
red the minds of many people to the pos- 
sibilities in the line of scientific specula* 
tion. This is shown in the numerous scientific 
communications received by The Maga- Speculatioii 
ziNE OF Wall Street, many of them 
from traders situated in remote localities. 

In the main, the writers, who are now 
carrying on long distance operations for 
the big swings are desirous of testing 
thei rability as Tape Readers. No doubt 
those who have written represent but a 
small percentage of the number who are 
thus inclined. 

To all such persons I would say : Be- 
fore you can make a success of Tape 
Reading you must acquire a broad fun- 
damental knowledge of the market. A 
professional singer who was recently 
called upon to advise a young aspirant 
said : ''One must become a 'personality^ 



Tape Reading 

— ^that IS, an intelligence developed by 
the study of many things besides music/' 
It is not enough to know a few of the 
underlying principles; one must have a 
deep understanding. 

To be sure it is possible for a per- 
son to take a number of the "tricks of 
the trade" herein mentioned and trade 
successfully on these alone. Even one 
idea which forms part of the whole sub 
Bndleits j^^ ^^X ^ worked and elaborated upon 

PosaibUities until it becomes a method in itself. There 

are endless possibilities in this direction, 
and after all it matters little how the 
money is extracted from the market, so 
long as it is done legitimately. 

But real Tape Reading takes every- 
thing into account— every little charac- 
ter which appears on the tape plays its 
part in forming one of the endless series 
of "moving pictures." In many years' 
study of the tape, I do not remember hav- 
ing seen two of these "pictures" which 
ware duplicates. One can realize from 
this how impossible it would be to formu- 
late a simple set of rules to fit every case 
or even the majority of them, as each 
day's session produces hundreds of sit- 
uations, which, so far as memory serves, 
are never repeated. 

The subject of Tape Reading is there- 
fore practically inexhaustible, which 
makes it aU the more interesting to the 
man who has acquired the "study habit." 

Having fortified himself with the nec- 
essary fundamental knowledge, the stu- 



Closing ITrades^Suggettioni for Stadente 

dent of Tape Reading should thoroughly 
digest these Studies and any others which 
may be obtainable in future. It is not 
enough to go over and over a lesson as 
a school boy does, driving the facts into 
his heaJ by monotonous repetition ; tapes 
must be procured and the various indi- 
cations matched up with what has been 
studied. And even after one believes he 
understands, he will presently learn that, 
to quote the words of a certain song, 
"You don't know how much you know 
until you know how little you know." 
One of my instructors in another line of 
study used to make me go over a thing 
three or four times after I thought I knew 
it, just to make sure that I did. 

I should say that it is almost impos- 
sible for one who has never before traded 
from the tape to go into a broker's office, 
start right in and operate successfully. 
In the nrst place, there are the abbrevia-> 
tions and all the little characters and their 
meanings to know the abbreviations of 
the principal stocks; it is necessary to 
know everything that appears on the tape, 
so that nothing will be overlooked. Oth- 
erwise the operator will be like a person 
who attempts to read classic literature 
without knowing words of more than 
four letters. 

It is a common impression in the Street 
that anyone who has the price can buy 
a seat on the Stock Exchange and at 
once begin making money as a floor trad* 
er. But floor trading is also a business 



It 
Thoroagfaly 



Floor 
Trading 



Tape 

that one has to learn, and it usually takes 
months and years to become accustomed 
to the physical and nervous strain and 
learn the ropes. 

Frequent requests are made for the 
name of someone who will teach the Art 
of Tape Reading. I do not know of any- 
one able to read the tape with profit who 
is willing to become an instructor. The 
reason is very simple. Profits from the 
tape far exceed an3rthing that might be 
eanied in tuition fees. 

In addition to the large operators and 
floor traders who use Tape Reading in 
their daily work, there are a niunber of 
New York Stock Exchange members who 
never go on the floor, but spend the ses- 
sion at the ticker in their respective 
ofiices. Experience has taught them that 
they can produce larger profits by this 
method, else they would not follow it. 
The majority of them trade in 500-share 
lots and up and their business forms an 
important share of the daily volume. 

A number of so-called semi-profes- 
[ntuhive sionals operate on what may be termed 

rape Reading intuitive tape reading. They have no 

well-defined code of rules and probably 
could not explain clearly just how they 
do it, but they **get the money" and that 
is the best proof of the pudding. 

The existence of even a comparatively 
small body of successful Tape Readers 
is evidence that money makmg by this 
means is an accomplished fact and shoulA 
encourage others. 



Closing Trade*— Suggestions for Students 

One of the greatest difficulties which 
the novice has to overcome is known by 
the slangy but expressive term, "cold 
feet/' Too many people start and dab- 
ble a little without going far enough to 
determine whether or not they can make 
a go of it. And even those who get 
pretty well along in the subject will be 
scared to death at a string of losses and 
quit just when they should dig in harder. 

For in addition to learning the art 
they must form a sort of trading char- 
acter, which no amount of reverses can 
discourage nor turn back and which con- 
stantly strives to eliminate its own weak 
points such as fear, greed, anxiety, nerv'- 
ousness and the many other mental fac- ^wlSSr»» 
tors which go to make or unmake the 
profit coliunn. 

Perhaps I have painted a difficult 
proposition. If so, the greater will be 
the reward of those who master it. As 
stated at the beginning. Tape Reading 
is hard work. There seems no good 
reason for altering that opinion. 



—171— 



XIIL Two Days* Trading 

BELOW is a record of transactions 
made by me, results having been 
obtained by following the meth- 
ods suggested in the within series 
on Tape Reading. The object is to show 
the possibilities alonj[^ this line and to 
encourage! the many who are now endeav* 
oring to master the art. 

It wii! be observed that out of fifteen 
transactions, figuring on the buying and 
selling prices alone, there were thirteen 
profits and only one loss. One transac- 
tion showed neither prcht nor loss. 

Seven trader, were on the long side and 
eight on the short. The stock fluctuate 
ed between 166^ and 170^ (3^ points) 
during these two sessions, and gave nu- 
merous trading opportunities. 

All transactions were protected by a 
close stop, in some cases not more tiian 
yi or yi from the original buying or sell* 
ing price. These stop orders were not 
alwa3'S put on the floor for the reason 
that in such active trading, stops could 
be changed or cancelled morie quickly 
when they were carried in the head and 
executed "at the market" when the price 
hit the required figure." 



Two Days' Trading 



o 



8 

s 



t '^•^ 






J«|S« #3« 



eo 






1 . 



i 






e o 

a 



COOOOOficOOeeo 
^•g-g-g-g-gJl-g-gJI-g 



-gi 
I* 



a 

a 



o 



0< 









— »173— 



XIV. Tke Principlea AppKed to 
Wicicr Savings 

THE first edition of this book hav- 
ing been exhausted, it has been 
my privilege to edit the foregoing 
chapters in preparation for the 
second edition. This has required a con- 
sideration of the principles therein set 
forth, and has enabled me to test and 
compare these principles in their adapta- 
tion to the stock market of 1916. 

I find that in no important degree is 
it necessary to modify what has been 
written. While the character of the 
trading has altered since the outbreak 
of the European War, this change repre- 
sents more a shifting of the leadership 
and a widening of the swings, due to 
extraordinary conditions. 

Proof that these rules and methods are 
correct is also found in their adaptation 
to other forms of trading, chief among 
which is the detection of accumulation 
and distribution at certain important 
turning points in the market. 

I have used this method successfully 
in forecasting the maiket for these prin- 
cipal swiqgs and find it to be a mtidi 



The Principles Applied to Wider Savings 

more comfortable way of following the 
market, because it is not so confining. 
Preparation for a long up-swing or 
down-swing, as well as for *the inter- 
mediate movements which are numerous, 
is clearly apparent to those who under- 
stand the art of Tape Reading. 

In judging the market by its own ac- 
tion, it is uninportant whether you are 
endeavoring to forecast the next small 
half hourly swing or the trend for the 
next two or three weeks. The same in- 
dications as to price, volume, activity, 
support and pressure, are exhibited in 
the preparation for both. The same de- 
ments will be found in a drop of water 
as in the ocean, and vice versa. 

A study of the stock market means a 
study in the forces above and below the 

E resent level of prices. Each movement 
as its period of preparation, execution 
and culmination, and the most substan- 
tial of movements are those which make 
long preparation. Without this prepa- 
ration and gathering of force, a move- 
ment is not likely to be sustained. On 
the other hand, the greater the prepara- 
tion, the greater the probable extent of 
the swing. 

Preparation for the principal move- 
ments in the market will very often OC' 
cupy several months. This may be pre- 
ceded by a decline, in which large opera- 
tors accumulate their stocks. 'Diey may 
even precipitate this decline in order to 
pave the way for such accumulation. 

—175— 



Tape Reading 

Large operators differ from small ones 
in their ability to foresee important 
changes in stock market values from six 
months to a year in advance, and to 
prepare themselves therefor. A study of 
these preparatory periods discloses to 
these who understand the anatomy of 
market movements the direction and pos- 
sible extent of the next big swing. Thus, 
a study of these important turning points, 
principal among which are booms and 
panics, is the most essential. 

Small operators should take a leaf 
from the book of those who buy and 
sell enormous quantities of securities. It 
is their foresight which enables them to 
profit. To cultivate foresight means to 
study technical and other conditions. 

In a lecture at the Finance Forum, 
New York, the writer showed how all 
influences of every sort affecting the 
stock market are shown on the tape, and 
in the changes in prices. A copy of 
this lecture accompanies each copy of 
this book, and is sent gratis in order 
that the reader may thoroughly under- 
stand the advantage of stud)ring the fluc- 
tuations instead of the fundamental fac- 
tors such as crops, money, politics, rail- 
road earnings, etc., all ot which are fin- 
ally interpreted into the prices which 
appear on the tape. 

While I would not for a moment dis- 
courage the student from acquiring a 
knowledge, and giving some considera-. 
tion to the Fundamental Statistics, the 



The Principles Applied to Wider Savings 

advantages of studying the action of the 
market, as a guide to future prices, are 
productive of too great results to war- 
rant their dilution with factors which 
are really of secondary importance. I 
make this claim because of my convic- 
tion that the position of large operators 
is more important than the so-called 
basic factors. 

For several years past I have applied 
the principles in this book to the tore- 
casting of the swings of from 5 to 20 
points. Results have been highly satis- 
factory. 

For this reason I can recommend that 
the subject be studied with a view to the 
formation of a method of trading, espe- 
cially adapted to the individual require- 
ments of those who wish to follow this 
intensely interesting and highly profitable 
pursuit 



—177— 



,., "*» 







7 \^^% 



